# ORDER 22.---COSTS.

## Division 1.---Preliminary.

### 1\. Interpretation of Order 22. (52/1, 2)

\(1\) In this Order, unless the contrary intention appears ---

\"bill\" means bill of costs;

\"certificate\" includes allocatur;

\"contentious business\" includes all actions, suits and proceedings;

\"copy\" includes manuscript copy, copy by a carbon impression,
machine-made engrossment, and other facsimile;

\"taxed costs\" means costs taxed in accordance with this Order;

\"trustee\" includes an executor of a will and an administrator of the
estate of a deceased person.

\(2\) In this Order ---

\(a\) a reference to a fund, being a fund out of which costs are to be
paid, or being a fund held by a trustee, extends to any property held
for the benefit of any person or class of persons, or held on trust
for any purpose; and

\(b\) a reference to a fund held by a trustee extends to any property
to which he is entitled as trustee, whether alone or together with any
other person and whether the property is for the time being in the
possession of the trustee or not.

### 2\. Transitional.

This Order shall not affect the rights of a solicitor or client in
respect of matters pending on the commencement date.

### 3\. Application. (52/3)

This Order applies, subject to its terms, to and in respect of costs
payable or to be taxed under any order of the Court or under these Rules
and costs to be taxed in the Court under any Act.

### 4\. Powers of the Court generally. (52/4)

\(1\) The powers and discretions of the Court in relation to costs shall
be exercised subject to and in accordance with this Order.

\(2\) Subject to Sub-rule (1), this Order has effect subject to these
Rules and subject to any Act.

### 5\. Time for dealing with costs. (52/5)

\(1\) The Court may, in any proceedings, exercise its powers and
discretions as to costs at any stage of the proceedings or after the
conclusion of the proceedings.

\(2\) Where the Court makes an order in any proceedings for the payment
of costs, the Court may require that the costs be paid immediately,
notwithstanding that proceedings are not concluded.

## Division 2.---General.

Subdivision A.---General.

### 6\. Taxed costs and other provisions. (52/6)

\(1\) Subject to this Order, where, by or under these Rules or any order
of the Court, costs are to be paid to any person, that person shall be
entitled to his taxed costs.

\(2\) Where the Court orders that costs be paid to any person, the Court
may further order that, as to the whole or any part (specified in the
order) of the costs, instead of taxed costs, that person shall be
entitled to ---

\(a\) a proportion specified in the order of the taxed costs; or

\(b\) the taxed costs from or up to a stage of the proceedings
specified in the order; or

\(c\) a gross sum specified in the order instead of the taxed costs;
or

\(d\) a sum in respect of costs to be ascertained in such manner as
the Court may direct.

### 7\. Costs in other courts. (52/7)

Where, in proceedings transferred to or removed into the Court, or in
proceedings on an appeal to the Court, the Court makes an order as to
the costs of proceedings before another court, the Court may ---

\(a\) specify the amount of the costs to be allowed; or

\(b\) order that the costs be taxed in accordance with this Order; or

\(c\) make orders for the ascertainment of the costs by taxation or
otherwise in that other court.

### 8\. Order for payment. (52/8)

Subject to this Order, a party to proceedings in the Court shall not be
entitled to recover any costs of or incidental to the proceedings from
any other party to the proceedings except under an order of the Court.

### 9\. Order for taxation: When not required. (52/9)

\(1\) Where ---

\(a\) an order of the Court directs the payment of costs; or

\(b\) proceedings are dismissed with costs; or

\(c\) a motion is refused with costs; or

\(d\) a party may tax costs under Rule 17 on the discontinuance of
proceedings; or

\(e\) a party may tax costs under Rule 18(1) or (2) on the acceptance
of money paid into Court,

the costs may be taxed without any order directing taxation.

\(2\) Where ---

\(a\) proceedings are dismissed with costs; or

\(b\) a motion is refused with costs,

and the costs are not paid within four days after the signing of a
certificate of taxation of the costs, a party to whom the costs are
payable may enter judgement for the taxed costs.

### 10\. Default judgement. (52/10)

\(1\) Where judgement is entered for costs under Division 3 Order 12
(default judgement) the costs shall not be taxed but shall be in
accordance with Table 2 of Schedule 2.

\(2\) Sub-rule (1) does not apply to a judgement directed to be entered
under Order 12 Rule 32.

Subdivision B.---Entitlement.

### 11\. Following the event. (52/11)

If the Court makes any order as to costs, the Court shall, subject to
this Order, order that the costs follow the event, except where it
appears to the court that some other order should be made to the whole
or any part of the costs.

### 12\. Amendment of pleading without leave. (52/12)

Where a party amends a pleading without leave, he shall, unless the
Court otherwise orders, pay the costs of and occasioned by the
amendment.

### 13\. Interlocutory application. (52/12A)

Subject to this Order, the costs of any application or other step in any
proceedings shall, unless the Court otherwise orders, be paid and
otherwise dealt with in accordance with the provisions of this Order or
the provisions of any order relating to the general costs of the
proceedings.

### 14\. Extension of time. (52/13)

Where a party applies for an extension of time, he shall, unless the
Court otherwise orders, pay the costs of and occasioned by the
application, or an order made on or in consequence of the application.

### 15\. Non-admission of fact. (52/14)

Where a party to any proceedings serves a notice disputing a fact under
Order 9 Rule 29(2) (notices to admit facts), and afterwards that fact is
proved in the proceedings, he shall, unless the Court otherwise orders,
pay the costs of proof.

### 16\. Non-admission of document. (52/15)

Where a party to any proceedings serves a notice disputing the
authenticity of a document under Order 9 Rule 31(2) (admission of
documents discovered), and afterwards the authenticity of the document
is proved in the proceedings, he shall, unless the Court otherwise
orders, pay the costs of proof.

### 17\. Discontinuance. (52/16)

\(1\) Where, under Order 8 Rule 61, a party to any proceedings
discontinues the proceedings without leave as to the whole or any part
of the relief claimed by him against any other party, the discontinuing
party shall, unless the Court otherwise orders, pay the costs of the
party against whom the discontinued claim is made, occasioned by the
discontinued claim and incurred before service of notice of the
discontinuance.

\(2\) A party whose costs are payable under Sub-rule (1) may tax the
costs and, if the taxed costs are not paid within four days after the
signing of a certificate of the taxation, may enter judgement for the
taxed costs.

### 18\. Payment into Court. (52/17)

\(1\) Where, under Order 8 Division 6, a plaintiff before the trial or
hearing begins ---

\(a\) accepts money brought into Court by a defendant in answer to a
cause of action; and

\(b\) abandons that cause of action as against all other defendants
(if any) sued on that cause of action jointly with the defendant
bringing the money into Court; and

\(c\) abandons all his other causes of action (if any),

then, after payment out, he may, unless the Court otherwise orders, tax
his costs of the proceedings in respect of his claims for relief against
the defendant bringing the money into Court, incurred before service of
notice of the deposit of the money accepted and, if the costs are not
paid within four days after the signing of a certificate of the taxation
enter judgement against that defendant for the taxed costs.

\(2\) Where a cross-claimant brings money into Court and, in his notice
of deposit, states pursuant to Order 8 Rule 73 that he takes into
account his cause of action on the cross-claim with a view to its
abandonment in case the money is accepted, and the money is accepted
before the trial or hearing begins, the cross-claimant may, unless the
Court otherwise orders, tax his costs of the cross-claim, incurred
before service of notice of the acceptance, and, if the costs are not
paid within four days after the signing of a certificate of the
taxation, enter judgement against the party accepting the money for the
taxed costs.

\(3\) Where money is paid into Court with or without a denial of
liability, and the plaintiff recovers less than the amount so paid in,
the plaintiff shall, unless for special cause the Court or a Judge shall
otherwise order, be entitled to an order for his costs to the date of
the payment in, but be ordered to pay all the costs of the defendant so
paying into Court from and after the date of such payment into Court.

### 19\. Offer of contribution. (52/19)

Where a party makes an offer of contribution within the application of
Order 8 Rule 49 (order of contribution), the Court may, in exercising
its discretion as to costs, take the offer into account.

### 20\. Disobedience to rule, judgement or order. (52/20)

Where any person fails to comply with any provision of these Rules or
any judgement or order of the Court, the Court may order him to pay the
costs of any-other person occasioned by the failure.

### 21\. Discovery before suit. (52/21)

The Court may, in proceedings in respect of any claim for relief,
include in any order for costs the costs of a party to the proceedings
of proceedings under Order 3 in respect of that claim for relief
including payments of conduct money and payments on account of expenses
and loss under that Order.

### 22\. Injunction. (52/21A)

Where the Court grants an interlocutory injunction and afterwards grants
a further interlocutory injunction continuing the first injunction with
or without modification an order as to the costs of the further
injunction shall, unless the Court otherwise orders, include the costs
of the first injunction.

Subdivision C.---Party and Party Basis.

### 23\. Application of Subdivision C. (52/22)

This Subdivision applies to costs which are to be paid to a party to any
proceedings either by another party to the proceedings or out of a fund.

### 24\. Party and party basis. (52/23)

\(1\) Costs shall be taxed on a party and party basis unless the costs
are to be taxed on the common fund basis under Rule 32 or on the trustee
basis under Rule 33.

\(2\) On a taxation on a party and party basis, there shall be allowed
all such costs as were necessary or proper for the attainment of justice
or for enforcing or defending the rights of the party whose costs are
being taxed.

### 25\. Costs where judgement for a small amount. (Vic. 65/121)

\(1\) Where in an action for tort or contract the plaintiff recovers by
judgement or otherwise a sum of less than K10,000.00 (or an order for
the possession of goods the value of which is less than K10,000.00 or a
sum of money plus an order for the possession of goods the aggregate
value of which is less than K10,000.00) he shall, unless the Court or
Judge otherwise orders, be entitled only to the costs he would have been
entitled to if he had brought his action in the District Court.

\(2\) For the purposes of Sub-rule (1) a plaintiff shall be treated as
recovering the full amount recoverable in respect of his claim without
regard to any deduction made in respect of contributory negligence on
his part.

### 26\. Second lawyer or overseas counsel.

\(1\) The fees, costs and expenses of ---

\(a\) a second lawyer; or

\(b\) overseas counsel,

may be allowed on taxation only if, and to the extent that, they are
certified for by the trial Judge.

\(2\) In this Rule \"overseas counsel\" means a barrister or solicitor
who is not resident in the country and normally carries on practice as a
lawyer outside the country.

### 27\. Refreshers. (52/25)

\(1\) Where counsel is briefed to appear on a trial or hearing, and the
trial or hearing occupies more than six hours, and costs are taxed on a
party and party basis, the taxing officer may allow refresher fees in
such amount as he thinks fit for every six hours or part of six hours
occupied by the trial or hearing after the first six hours and for the
remaining duration of the trial or hearing.

\(2\) The taxing officer may allow refreshers under Sub-rule (1) whether
or not witnesses are examined at the trial or hearing.

### 28\. Absence of counsel. (52/26)(A.C.T. 65/83)

\(1\) Where counsel is briefed to appear on a trial or hearing, and
costs are taxed on a party and party basis, counsel\'s fee on the brief
shall not be allowed unless ---

\(a\) he is present at the trial or hearing for a substantial part of
the relevant period; or

\(b\) he gives substantial assistance during the relevant period in
the conduct of the proceedings; or

\(c\) the Court otherwise orders.

\(2\) In Sub-rule (1), \"relevant period\" means the period of the trial
or hearing or, if the trial or hearing lasts more than six hours, the
first six hours.

\(3\) Where counsel is briefed to appear on a trial or hearing, a
refresher fee shall not be allowed to him for any period unless ---

\(a\) he is present at the trial or hearing for a substantial part of
that period; or

\(b\) he gives substantial assistance during that period in the
conduct of the proceedings; or

\(c\) the Court otherwise orders.

\(4\) In actions where a barrister and solicitor acts in both
capacities, or appears as a barrister instructed by his partner acting
as solicitor, neither he nor his partner shall be entitled to make any
charge for \"Preparing any brief or case to counsel to advise\" or
\"Preparing any instructions to counsel to settle any document\", but in
lieu of such charges the barrister and solicitor, or partner, as the
case may be, shall be entitled to such fees as are allowed by the taxing
officer for \"Preparation for trial.\"

### 29\. Six-hour period. (52/27)

In reckoning the six hour periods referred to in Rules 27 and 28 the
mid-day adjournment and any other adjournment shall not be included
unless the Court or the taxing officer otherwise orders.

### 30\. Counsel before Registrar, etc. (52/28)

On a taxation on a party and party basis, or in respect of proceedings
before the Registrar in the probate jurisdiction or the matrimonial
causes jurisdiction, costs in respect of counsel attending before the
Registrar shall not be allowed unless the Registrar certifies the
attendance to be proper or the Court otherwise orders.

Subdivision D.---Common Fund and Trustee Bases.

### 31\. Application of Subdivision D. (52/29)

This Subdivision applies to costs which by or under these Rules or any
order of the Court are to be paid to a party to any proceedings either
by another party to the proceedings or out of a fund.

### 32\. Common fund basis. (52/30)

\(1\) The Court may order that costs be taxed on the common fund basis.

\(2\) The common fund basis is a more generous basis than the party and
party basis.

\(3\) On a taxation on the common fund basis ---

\(a\) there shall be allowed a reasonable amount in respect of all
costs reasonably incurred; and

\(b\) the ordinary rules applied on a taxation as between solicitor
and client where the costs are to be paid out of a common fund in
which the client and others are interested shall be applied, whether
or not the costs are in fact to be so paid.

### 33\. Trustee basis. (52/31)

\(1\) Where a person who is or has been a party to proceedings in the
capacity of trustee is entitled to be paid costs out of any fund which
he holds in that capacity, the costs shall be taxed on the trustee
basis.

\(2\) Where the Court makes an order for the payment to a person of
costs out of a fund, the Court may order that the costs be taxed on the
trustee basis and as if he were a trustee of the fund.

\(3\) Where the Court makes an order for the payment to a person of
costs and he is or was a party to the proceedings in the capacity of
trustee, the Court may order that the costs he taxed on the trustee
basis and as if the costs were to be paid out of a fund held by him.

\(4\) On a taxation on the trustee basis, no costs shall be disallowed,
except in so far as those costs or any part of their amount should not,
in accordance with the duty of the trustee as trustee, have been
incurred or paid, and should for that reason be borne by him personally.

Subdivision E.---Solicitor and Client Basis.

### 34\. Application of Subdivision E. (52/32)

Rule 35 applies to any taxation on a solicitor and client basis except
where taxation has been excluded under Section 23 of the *Lawyers Act*.

### 35\. Solicitor and client basis. (52/33)

\(1\) All costs shall be allowed except as specified in this Rule.

\(2\) Costs shall not be allowed in so far as they are of an
unreasonable amount, unless the amount has been approved by the client.

\(3\) Costs shall not be allowed in so far as they are unreasonably
incurred, unless incurred with the approval of the client.

\(4\) An approval for the purpose of this Rule may be express or
implied.

\(5\) Notwithstanding Sub-rules (2) and (3) where costs are incurred
which in the circumstances of the case are of an unusual nature and such
that they would not be allowed on a taxation of costs on a party and
party basis under Rule 24 the costs shall not be allowed, unless it is
shown ---

\(a\) that the costs were reasonably incurred; or

\(b\) that before the costs were incurred the solicitor expressly
warned the client that the costs might not be allowed on a taxation of
costs on a party and party basis.

\(6\) Where the client is a disabled person, references to the client in
Sub-rules (2), (3), and (4) shall be read as references to his next
friend or guardian at law.

Subdivision F.---Scale of Costs.

### 36\. Scale of costs. (52/67)

\(1\) Subject to this Rule, the provisions of Table 1 of Schedule 2
shall apply to the taxation of costs incurred in relation to proceedings
commenced in the Court after the commencement date.

\(2\) On a taxation ---

\(a\) to which Subdivision D. (common fund and trustee bases) and
Subdivision E. (solicitor and client basis) apply; and

\(b\) in any other special case,

costs may, at the discretion of the taxing officer, be allowed ---

\(c\) in relation to items not mentioned in Table 1 of Schedule 2; or

\(d\) of an amount higher than that prescribed by Table 1 of Schedule
2.

\(3\) A taxing officer, when exercising his discretion under Sub-rule
(2) or in respect of any item marked \"discretionary\" in Table 1 of
Schedule 2 shall have regard to ---

\(a\) the complexity of the item or of the proceedings in which it
arose and the difficulty or novelty of the question involved; and

\(b\) the skill, specialized knowledge and responsibility required of
and the time spent and work done by the solicitor or counsel; and

\(c\) the number and importance of the documents (however brief)
prepared or perused; and

\(d\) the place and circumstances in which the business involved was
transacted; and

\(e\) the importance of the proceedings to the client; and

\(f\) where money or property was involved, its amount or value; and

\(g\) any other fees and allowances payable to the solicitor or
counsel in respect of other items in the same proceedings, but only
where work done in relation to those items has reduced the work which
would otherwise have been necessary in relation to the item in
question.

\(4\) Costs shall, unless the Court otherwise orders, be allowed in the
cases to which Table 2 of Schedule 2 applies in accordance with the
provisions of that Table and not in accordance with Table 1 of that
Schedule.

### 37\. Probate. (52/68)

\(1\) Table 5 of Schedule 2 shall apply to proceedings for probate or
administration or for resealing of probate or letters of administration
where no contention has arisen.

\(2\) Unless under Table 5 of Schedule 2 the value of the estate or
unadministered assets exceeds K4,000.00 a solicitor may not, without the
leave of the Court, file his bill for taxation.

\(3\) If the amount allowed on a taxation to which Sub-rule (2) applies,
does not exceed the amount allowable applying Table 5, the solicitor
whose bill it is shall not, unless the taxing officer otherwise orders,
be allowed the costs to which, apart from this Sub-rule, he would be
entitled for drawing and copying the bill and for attending the
taxation.

\(4\) Sub-rule (3) does not affect the operation of Rule 63(b).

\(5\) Where in contentious proceedings the Court directs the taxation of
costs in connection with the obtaining of probate or administration or
resealing of probate or letters of administration, the costs prescribed
in Table 5 of Schedule 2 may, unless the Court otherwise orders, be
allowed separately and in addition to the costs incurred in the
contentious proceedings.

\(6\) A bill for taxation under this Rule shall bear a note of the value
of the estate or of the unadministered assets, whichever is appropriate.

\(7\) A bill, either for taxation or moderation, shall be served on each
executor, administrator or trustee before it is filed.

\(8\) A request for either taxation or moderation shall be endorsed on
the bill in the prescribed form and signed by each executor,
administrator and trustee.

## Division 3.---Taxing Officer.

### 38\. Registrar to be taxing officer. (52/34)

The Registrar shall be the taxing officer of the Court.

### 39\. General powers. (52/37)

The taxing officer may, in the discharge of his functions with respect
to the taxation of costs or any other functions under this Order ---

\(a\) dispense with the filing or service of notice of a motion to
proceed with taxation; and

\(b\) require any party represented jointly with any other party in
any proceedings before him to be separately represented and

\(c\) take evidence by the examination of witnesses or otherwise; and

\(d\) direct the production of any document; and

\(e\) adjourn any proceedings before him; and

\(f\) do such other things as the Court may by order direct.

### 40\. Time. (52/38)

The taxing officer may exercise the powers of the Court to extend times
under Order 1 Rule 15 and to fix times under Order l Rule 16, in
relation to the commencement of a taxation and in relation to the doing
of anything in or in connection with the proceedings before him.

### 41\. Absence of party. (52/34)

Where a party entitled to attend any matter before the taxing officer
has had due notice of the time appointed for the matter, or where notice
to a party has been dispensed with under Rule 39, the taxing officer may
proceed in his absence.

### 42\. Costs of proceedings before taxing officer. (52/40)

\(1\) Costs to be taxed under an order shall, unless the order otherwise
provides, include the costs of the taxation.

\(2\) Costs to be taxed under these Rules shall include the costs of the
taxation.

\(3\) Subject to Sub-rules (1), (2) and (4) and to any order of the
Court, a taxing officer may make orders as to the costs of or incidental
to any proceedings before him and shall include in his certificate the
amount of those costs and a statement of the persons to whom and by whom
those costs are to be paid or the fund out of which those costs are to
be paid.

\(4\) Sub-rules (1), (2) and (3) apply subject to any Act and subject to
Sub-rule 56(2).

## Division 4.---Taxation.

### 43\. Order subject to appeals etc. (52/42)

Where an order is made for the payment of costs, and the costs are to be
taxed, the costs may, unless the Court otherwise orders, be taxed,
notwithstanding that the order for payment of costs is liable to be set
aside, varied or discharged on appeal or otherwise.

### 44\. Costs in account. (52/44)

Where the Court orders that an account be taken and the account consists
in part of costs, the Court may, by the same or a later order, direct
that those costs be taxed by the taxing officer.

### 45\. Party costs. (52/43)

\(1\) This Rule applies to costs of or incidental to proceedings in the
Court, including ---

\(a\) in the case of an appeal to the Court---the costs of or
incidental to the proceedings giving rise to the appeal; and

\(b\) in the case of proceedings transferred to or removed into the
Court---the costs of or incidental to the whole proceedings, both
before and after removal,

but does not apply to the taxation of costs for any business done by a
solicitor, being a taxation under Section 63 of the Lawyers Act 1986.

\(2\) Where ---

\(a\) by or under these Rules costs are to be taxed and are to be paid
to any party either by another party to the proceedings or out of a
fund; or

\(b\) by or under an order of the Court made in any proceedings costs
are to be taxed and are to be paid to any party either by another
party to the proceedings or out of a fund; or

\(c\) in any proceedings the Court makes an order under Rule 44; or

\(d\) costs are payable under any Act under which costs may be taxed
in the Court without an order of or reference to the Court for
taxation, except the taxation of costs to which Paragraphs (a), (b)
and (c) apply,

an application may be made to the Registrar to have the costs taxed.

\(3\) This Rule shall not prevent the parties to an action agreeing as
to the amount of the costs to be paid by the party or fund liable to pay
costs to another party.

### 46\. Application for taxation.

\(1\) An application under Rule 45(2) shall be in writing and shall be
filed.

\(2\) The bill to be taxed and a copy of it shall be annexed to the
application.

\(3\) Where the Court has made an order directing the taxation of the
costs, that order or a copy of it shall also be annexed to the
application.

\(4\) A copy of the application shall be served by the party seeking the
taxation on every other interested party.

### 47\. Application for taxation under Section 63 of the Lawyers Act.

\(1\) This rule applies to proceedings for the taxation of costs under
Section 63 of the Lawyers Act 1986.

\(2\) An application to the Court under Section 63 of the Lawyers Act
1986 shall be made in writing and shall be filed.

\(3\) The bill to be taxed and a copy of it shall be annexed to the
application.

\(4\) A copy of the application shall be served by the person seeking
the taxation on the lawyer who rendered the bill.

\(5\) The succeeding rules of this Division shall apply to an order that
the bill be taxed in the same manner as they apply to an application
under Rule 46, with such modifications as are necessary.

### 48\. Notification of time appointed for taxation.

\(1\) Where an application is made to the Registrar under Rule 45 or an
order for a bill to be taxed is made under Section 63 of the Lawyers Act
1986 the Registrar shall fix a time and place for the taxation and shall
give notice of the time and place so fixed to the person applying for
the taxation or in whose favour the order is made, as the case may be,
to the solicitor concerned, and to every other interested party.

\(2\) The bill shall be taxed and settled by the Registrar at the time
and place fixed by the Registrar under Sub-rule (1) subject to such
adjournments as the Registrar may consider necessary from time to time.

\(3\) Where either party to the proceedings does not appear at the time
and place fixed by the Registrar under Sub-rule (1), the Court may order
the Registrar to proceed with the taxation.

### 49\. Bill. (52/49)

\(1\) A bill shall contain particulars of ---

\(a\) the work done by the lawyer, his servants and agents; and

\(b\) the disbursements made; and

\(c\) the costs claimed for the work done.

\(2\) In every bill the professional charges shall be entered in a
separate column from the disbursements, and every column shall be cast
before the bill is left for taxation.

\(3\) Where it is a clerk who does any work included in a bill and that
fact is relevant to the amount of costs allowable for the work, the name
and position of the clerk shall be stated in the bill.

\(4\) Where a liability to make a disbursement has been incurred or a
fee to counsel has been incurred and the disbursement or fee would be
properly included in a bill if paid ---

\(a\) the disbursement or fee may be included in the bill
notwithstanding that it has not been paid; and

\(b\) the bill shall state that the disbursement or fee has not been
paid; and

\(c\) subject to Sub-rule (5), on taxation, the disbursement or fee
shall not be allowed unless Paid before the taxation is completed.

\(5\) Sub-rule (4)(c) shall not apply where, in proceedings under the
*Matrimonial Causes Act* 1963, on taxation of a bill of a female
petitioner or respondent, her lawyer gives a written understanding to
the Registrar that all or any fees or disbursements in that bill will be
paid by the lawyer out of the first money received by or on behalf of
his client in payment of the costs allowed.

\(6\) The Court or the taxing officer may give leave, on terms, for the
amendment of a bill.

\(7\) A bill must be endorsed with ---

\(a\) the name or firm and business address of the lawyer whose bill
it is; and

\(b\) if the lawyer is the agent of another, with the name or firm and
business address of that other lawyer.

### 50\. Service of bill.

A bill need not be served on a lawyer whose bill it is.

### 51\. Attendance of parties. (52/51)

\(1\) The taxing officer may ---

\(a\) arrange and direct what parties should attend before him on any
taxation; and

\(b\) disallow the costs of attendance of any party whose attendance
he considers unnecessary

\(2\) Notwithstanding Sub-rule (1), any party interested may attend any
taxation.

### 52\. Notice of adjournment. (52/52)

Where the taxing officer adjourns a taxation, he may order any party
attending before him to serve notice of the adjournment on any absent
party.

### 53\. Costs out of fund: Notice to persons interested. (52/53)

\(1\) Where costs are payable out of a fund, the taxing officer taxing a
bill of the costs may ---

\(a\) adjourn the taxation to a specified date; and

\(b\) order the lawyer whose bill it is or the party to whom the costs
are payable to send to any person interested in the fund, free of
charge to that person, a copy of the whole or any part of the bill and
a letter in accordance with Sub-rule (2).

\(2\) A letter ordered to be sent under Sub-rule (1) shall state ---

\(a\) that the costs are payable out of the fund (identifying it) and
that the bill is being taxed; and

\(b\) the name and address of the taxing officer; and

\(c\) the adjourned date for further proceedings with the taxation;
and

\(d\) such other information as the taxing officer may direct.

### 54\. Reference to Court. (52/54)

The taxing officer may, on his own motion, refer to the Court for
direction, any question arising in a taxation.

### 55\. Default of party entitled. (52/55)

\(1\) Where a party is entitled to apply under this Division to have
costs taxed but does not, within a reasonable time after service on him
of a written request to do so by a party liable for the costs, file and
serve an application, the taxing officer may fix a time within which the
party entitled must file and serve an application to have costs taxed.

\(2\) Where a party entitled to costs fails to make application in
accordance with Rule 45 the taxing officer may fix a time within which
the party entitled must file or serve his bill.

\(3\) Where a party entitled to costs fails to file and serve an
application to have the costs taxed or fails to file or serve his bill
within a time fixed under this Rule, the taxing officer may certify the
failure and may disallow the costs of the party entitled or allow them
at such amount as he thinks fit.

\(4\) Where a party entitled to costs defaults by failing to proceed
with taxation, the taxing officer may, for the purpose of preventing any
other party being adversely affected by the default, certify the default
and may ---

\(a\) disallow the costs of the defaulting party or allow them at such
amount as he thinks fit; and

\(b\) certify the costs of the other parties.

### 56\. Disallowance of fees for taxation. (52/56)

\(1\) Where a solicitor ---

\(a\) fails to file his bill for taxation within the time fixed by or
under this Order; or

\(b\) otherwise delays or impedes the taxation,

the solicitor shall not, unless the taxing officer otherwise orders, be
allowed the fees to which, apart from this Sub-rule, he would be
entitled for preparing his bill of costs and for attending the taxation.

\(2\) If, on the taxation of any costs, one-sixth or more of the amount
of the bill for those costs is taxed off, the solicitor whose bill it is
shall not be allowed the fees to which, apart from this Sub-rule, he
would be entitled for preparing the bill and for attending the taxation.

### 57\. Liability of solicitor. (52/57)

Where, in any proceedings before the taxing officer, a solicitor for any
party ---

\(a\) is guilty of neglect or delay; or

\(b\) puts any other party to unnecessary expense, the taxing officer
may order the solicitor to pay costs to any party.

### 58\. Cross costs. (52/58)

\(1\) Where a party entitled to be paid costs is also liable to pay
costs, the taxing officer may ---

\(a\) tax the costs which that party is liable to pay and set off the
amount allowed against the amount he is entitled to be paid and
certify the amount of the balance and the parties by and to whom the
balance is payable; or

\(b\) withhold his certificate for the costs which that party is
entitled to be paid until that party has paid or tendered the amount
he is liable to pay.

\(2\) Costs in any proceedings may be set off under Sub-rule (1)(a)
notwithstanding that a solicitor for a party to the proceedings has a
lien for costs in the proceedings.

### 59\. Certificate. (52/59)

\(1\) The taxing officer may make separate and interim certificates.

\(2\) Where, in the course of the taxation of a solicitor\'s bill to his
own client, it appears to the taxing officer that in any event the
solicitor will be liable in connection with the bill to pay money to the
client, he may make an interim certificate specifying an amount which in
his opinion is payable by the solicitor to the client.

\(3\) The taxing officer shall, after the conclusion of the taxation of
any bill, make a final certificate of his disallowance of the costs in
the bill or of the amount at which he allows the costs.

\(4\) Where the taxing officer decides to allow or disallow, wholly or
in part, any item in a bill or to allow some amount in respect of any
item, he shall not, except with the consent of the parties interested,
make a certificate dealing finally with that item, until the expiry of
14 days after the date of the decision.

\(5\) A certificate made by the taxing officer in any proceedings shall,
unless made on a filed bill, be filed in the proceedings.

\(6\) On the making of a certificate under Sub-rule (2), the Court may
order the amount specified in the certificate to be paid to the client
or into Court.

\(7\) The taxing officer may make a separate or interim certificate in
respect of any item in a bill notwithstanding an application for review
under Rule 60 to his decision on any other item in the hill.

### 60\. Application for review of taxation. (U.K. 62/33)

\(1\) Any party to any taxation proceedings who is dissatisfied with the
allowance or disallowance in whole or in part of any item by the taxing
officer, or with the amount allowed by the taxing officer in respect of
any item, may apply on motion to a Judge to review the decision in
respect of that item.

\(2\) An application for review of the taxing officer\'s decision shall
be made within 14 days after the date of the decision objected to or
within such further time as the Court may allow.

\(3\) Every applicant for review under this Rule must at the time of
making his application deliver to the taxing officer objections in
writing specifying the list of items to which the applicant objects and
must state concisely the nature and grounds of each objection.

\(4\) An applicant for review under this Rule shall serve a copy of the
objections on each other party (if any) who attended the taxation of
those items and any other person whom the taxing officer directs shall
be served.

### 61\. Review. (U.K. 62/35)

\(1\) On the review, unless the Court for good reason otherwise directs

\(a\) no further evidence shall be received; and

\(b\) a party shall not raise any ground of objection not stated in
the statement of objections delivered to the taxing officer.

\(2\) Subject to Sub-rule (1), on the review the Court may exercise all
such powers and discretions as are vested in the taxing officer in
relation to the subject matter of the application.

### 62\. Judgement. (52/63)

Where the amount of any costs has been certified under this Division the
Court may, on motion by a party, direct the entry of such judgement for
the costs as the nature of the case requires.

## Division 5.---Miscellaneous.

### 63\. Costs of solicitor appointed as guardian at law. (52/64)

Where the Court appoints a solicitor to be guardian at law or next
friend of a disabled person who is a party to any proceedings, the Court
may ---

\(a\) order that the costs to be incurred in performance of the duties
of guardian at law or next friend be paid-

\(i\) by the parties to the proceedings or any of them; or

\(ii\) out of any fund in Court in which the disabled person is
interested; and

\(b\) make orders for the repayment or allowance of the costs as the
nature of the case may require.

### 64\. Trustee or mortgagee. (52/65)

\(1\) Where a person is or has been a party to any proceedings in the
capacity of trustee or mortgagee, he shall, unless the Court otherwise
orders, be entitled to the costs of the proceedings out of the fund held
by the trustee or out of the mortgaged property, as the case may be, in
so far as the costs are not paid by any other person.

\(2\) The Court may otherwise order under Sub-rule (1) only where ---

\(a\) the trustee or mortgagee has acted unreasonably; or

\(b\) in the case of a trustee, he has in substance acted for his own
benefit rather than for the benefit of the fund.

### 65\. Personal liability of solicitor for costs. (52/66)

\(1\) Where costs are incurred improperly or without reasonable cause,
or are wasted by undue delay or by any other misconduct or default, and
it appears to the Court that a solicitor is responsible (whether
personally or through a servant or agent), the Court may, after giving
the solicitor a reasonable opportunity to be heard ---

\(a\) disallow the costs as between him and his client; and

\(b\) direct the solicitor to repay to his client costs which the
client has been ordered to pay to any other party; and

\(c\) direct the solicitor to indemnify any party other than his
client against costs payable by the party indemnified.

\(2\) Without limiting the generality of Sub-rule (1) a solicitor is
responsible for default for the purposes of that Sub-rule where any
proceedings cannot conveniently proceed, or fail or are adjourned
without useful progress being made, because of the failure of the
solicitor ---

\(a\) to attend in person or by a proper representative; or

\(b\) to file any document which ought to have been filed; or

\(c\) to deliver any document which ought to have been delivered for
the use of the Court; or

\(d\) to be prepared with any proper evidence or account; or

\(e\) otherwise to proceed.

\(3\) The Court may, before making an order under Sub-rule (1), refer
the matter to the taxing officer for enquiry and report.

\(4\) The Court may order that notice of any proceedings or order
against a solicitor under this Rule shall be given to his client in such
manner as may be specified in the order under this sub-rule.

PART 8. ---HUMAN RIGHTS JURISDICTION

[^11]**ORDER 23.--- HUMAN RIGHTS.**

### 1\. Interpretation.

In this Part, unless the contrary intention appears:

*Basic Rights* means the rights and freedoms described in Rule 5;

*Bougainville Constitution* means the *Constitution of the Autonomous
Region of Bougainville*;

*Constitutional Laws* has the same meaning it has in the Constitution;

*Human Rights* refers to the rights and freedoms described in Rule 5;

*Listing Judge* means the Judge conducting listing of cases pursuant
to the Listings Rules.

*Listings Rules* means Order 10 Rule 9A of the *National Court Rules*;

### 2\. Purpose.

The purpose of these Rules is to facilitate a quick and just resolution
of Court proceedings instituted under Sections 57 and 58 of the
*Constitution* for enforcement of the Basic Rights (also known as "Human
Rights") and for enforcement under Section 23 of the *Constitution* of
prohibitions, restrictions or duties imposed by the Constitutional Laws
and of related matters.

### 3\. Administration.

\(1\) There shall be a Human Rights List maintained by the Registrar
which shall contain the reference numbers, names and status of the
proceedings described in Rule 5.

\(2\) The Chief Justice may appoint a Judge to be Judge Administrator of
the Human Rights Track at the Waigani Registry and may from time to time
appoint any Judge to deal with proceedings on the Human Rights List.

\(3\) The Registrar shall appoint an officer to be the senior officer in
charge of registry matters concerning the Human Rights List and shall
appoint such other staff as are necessary to ensure the efficient and
orderly running of the Human Rights List.

### 4\. Application.

These Rules are designed to facilitate the running of the Human Rights
List.

### 5\. Human rights proceedings.

The following proceedings shall be placed on the Human Rights List, and
shall be dealt with in accordance with these Rules:

a\) proceedings that are, in substance, irrespective of whether
expressly so described, for enforcement under Sections 57 (*enforcement
of guaranteed rights and freedoms*) or 58 (*compensation*) of the
*Constitution* of any of the Basic Rights, viz:

i\) right to freedom (s 32);

ii\) right to life (s 35);

iii\) freedom from inhuman treatment (s 36);

iv\) protection of the law (s 37);

v\) proscribed acts (s 41);

vi\) liberty of the person (s 42);

vii\) freedom from forced labour (s 43);

viii\) freedom from arbitrary search and entry (s 44);

ix\) freedom of conscience, thought and religion (s 45);

x\) freedom of expression (s 46);

xi\) freedom of assembly and association (s 47);

xii\) freedom of employment (s 48);

xiii\) right to privacy (s 49);

xiv\) right to vote and stand for public office (s 50);

xv\) right to freedom of information (s 51);

xvi\) right to freedom of movement (s 52);

xvii\) protection from unjust deprivation of property (s 53);

xviii\) equality of citizens (s 55); and

b\) proceedings under Section 183 of the Bougainville *Constitution* for
enforcement of Basic Rights under that *Constitution*; and

c\) proceedings under Section 23 (*sanctions*) of the *Constitution* for
imposition of sanctions for breach of prohibitions, restrictions or
duties imposed by the Constitutional Laws in regard to human rights
issues; and

d\) complaints under Section 42(5) (*liberty of the person*) of the
*Constitution* that a person is unlawfully or unreasonably detained; and

e\) proceedings where a claim is made by the plaintiff for any relief or
remedy for any tort allegedly committed by a member of a disciplined
force, where the cause of action might reasonably be regarded as a
breach of one or more of the Basic Rights; and

f\) proceedings where the issues of fact or law that are likely to arise
overlap with the type of issues of fact or law that commonly arise in
enforcement proceedings under Sections 57, 58 or 23 of the
*Constitution*;

g\) any proceedings within the jurisdiction of the National Court
concerning the discharge of powers, functions, duties or
responsibilities under Part X (emergency powers) of the *Constitution*;
and

h\) applications for a writ of *habeas corpus* under Order 17 of the
*National Court Rules*; and

i\) proceedings for enforcement of the provisions of the *Correctional
Service Act* and the *Correctional Service Regulation* concerning
treatment of detainees, calculation of periods of detention and related
proceedings; and

j\) applications under Section 5(2)(c)(iii) (*notice of claims against
the State*) of the *Claims By and Against the State Act* to allow a
further period in which to give notice to the State of an intention to
make a claim against the State, where the claim relates to enforcement
of a right or freedom referred to in Division III.3 of the
*Constitution*.

### 6\. Standing to Bring or Appear in Proceedings.

Without derogating from Sections 57(1) and (2) of the *Constitution*,
persons who may bring or commence or appear in a human rights proceeding
include:

\(a\) a person whose human rights or freedoms are adversely affected
by any act or omission of ---

\(i\) the government or a governmental body or a person exercising
public power or performing public functions; or

\(ii\) a private person or a body corporate, including a company, and
any of its officers or employees exercising private powers or
performing private functions;

\(b\) a person acting on behalf of a person who is under a disability
or is unable to fully and freely exercise their right to bring an
application for enforcement of their human rights or freedoms;

\(c\) a person or body, whether public or private, who has an interest
in the protection and enforcement of human rights and freedoms;

\(d\) a person representing an international body with responsibility
for, or a principle function of which is, to protecting human rights
and freedoms under international laws and conventions such as the
*Universal Declaration of Human Rights* and any other declarations,
recommendations or decisions of the *General Assembly of the United
Nations* concerning human rights and freedoms;

\(e\) any other person or body who has a sufficient interest in the
protection and enforcement of human rights and freedoms, approved by
the Court.

### 7\. Commencement of Proceedings by a Party.

\(1\) A human rights proceeding may be commenced by:

\(a\) a Writ of Summons, in which case the file reference shall be "WS
(HR)";

\(b\) an Originating Summons, in which case the file reference shall
be "OS (HR)";

\(c\) filing a Human Rights Enforcement Application in Form 124, in
which case the file reference shall be "HRA".

\(2\) The person commencing proceedings under Sub-rule (1) shall be
called the "plaintiff" and the person against whom proceedings are
commenced shall be called "the defendant".

\(3\) The originating process for enforcement of a right or freedom
referred to in Division III.3 of the *Constitution* shall as far as is
practicable identify with precision, by reference to relevant provisions
of the *Constitution*:

\(a\) the right or freedom that has been allegedly infringed or of
which there is a reasonable probability of infringement; and

\(b\) the orders, declarations or other relief that is sought.

\(4\) A complaint under Section 42(5) of the *Constitution* that a
person is unlawfully or unreasonably detained may be made by filing a
Complaint of Unlawful or Unreasonable Detention in Form 125, in which
case ---

\(a\) the file reference shall be "HRC",

\(b\) the person making the complaint shall be called "the
complainant" and the person(s) against whom the complaint is made
shall be called "the respondent(s)".

\(5\) As to Filing Fees

\(a\) The filing of a Human Rights Enforcement Application or a
Complaint of Unlawful or Unreasonable Detention shall be free of fees;
and

\(b\) The Registrar shall for the purposes of other human rights
proceedings exercise the discretion whether a filing fee should be
paid by a plaintiff taking into account the nature of the proceedings
and whether payment of a filing fee might be a hardship to the
plaintiff.

\(6\) All human rights applications filed and pending determination by
the National Court prior to commencement of the Human Rights Rules shall
be retained under file reference MP No \... of \... (HR) and shall
constitute the inaugural Human Rights List.

### 8\. Commencement of Proceedings by the Court.

\(1\) Where a judge observes, or is informed by the Registrar or the
Sheriff or one of their officers, of facts which may constitute a breach
of Basic Rights the Court may commence proceedings on its own
initiative.

\(2\) Where the National Court commences proceedings on its own
initiative in accordance with Section 57 of the *Constitution* ---

\(a\) the file reference shall be "HROI" and the responding party, if
any, shall be called "the respondent"; and

\(b\) subject to this Rule, the originating process shall be in Form
126 or in such other terms as the Court considers appropriate.

\(3\) Nothing in these Rules derogates from the power and duty of the
National Court under Section 57(1) of the *Constitution* to, on its own
initiative, enforce the rights and freedoms referred to in Division
III.3 (basic rights) of the *Constitution* in an informal or such other
manner as the Court thinks fit, especially in urgent cases where it is
not practical to comply with formal requirements for commencement of
proceedings.

\(4\) Where the Court exercises a power under Sub-rule (2) a Court shall
ensure, that as soon as the circumstances permit, not being later than
seven days after the exercise of such power, a reference in Form 126 is
filed and thereafter served on the respondents.

### 9\. Statement of Alleged or Suspected Breach of Human Rights.

\(1\) Any Judge or Officer of the Court or any member of the Court staff
or any person, body or authority, including any member of the public,
may bring any instance of alleged or suspected breach or imminent breach
or threatened breach of human rights or freedoms to the attention of the
Court by delivering to the Registrar a completed Statement of Alleged or
Suspected Breach of Human Rights, in Form 127.

\(2\) After receiving a Statement of Alleged or Suspected Breach of
Human Rights, the Registrar shall, within one day, forward the
Statement, together with all other relevant information in the
possession of the Registrar, to a Judge.

\(3\) After receiving a Statement and other relevant information under
Sub-rule (2), the Judge shall decide what further action, if any, is
necessary, including whether to open a HROI file in relation to the
matter and whether to direct the Public Solicitor under Section
177(2)(b) of the *Constitution* to provide legal aid, advice and
assistance to a person.

### 10\. Request to place a proceeding on Human Rights List or to Remove a
Proceeding.

\(1\) When any proceedings are filed in Court, the plaintiff may
request, by filing a notice in Form 128, that the proceedings be placed
on the Human Rights List and, irrespective of whether such a request is
made, the Registrar or his delegate will decide, having regard to Rule 5
and other relevant considerations, whether the proceedings are
appropriate to be placed on the Human Rights List or on some other List.

\(2\) A person aggrieved by a decision under Sub-rule (1) may apply a
Judge, by notice of motion, for review of the decision, supported by a
listing statement in Form 129; and in such a case all parties to the
proceedings shall be given notice of the motion and the listing
statement, and shall have a right to be heard on the motion.

\(3\) The decision of the Court on a motion under Sub-rule (2) is final
and not subject to appeal.

### 11\. Applications, motions and directions after listing.

\(1\) Once a proceeding is placed on the Human Rights List, any
application or motion regarding that proceeding shall be set for hearing
before the Judge dealing with matters on the Human Rights List.

\(2\) Proceedings on the Human Rights List shall be set down for trial
in accordance with the directions of the Human Rights List Judge, who
may make such orders or give such directions under the Listings Rules as
are appropriate to ensure the just, efficient and expeditious disposal
of cases.

### 12\. Dispensation.

The provisions of Division 1.2 (general) of the *National Court Rules*
apply to these Rules.

SCHEDULE 1

Form 1---Heading

Form 1.

O.2, rr.22, 23

HEADING.

In the National Court of Justice . . . No. . . of 20\..., at . . . Papua
New Guinea

JOHN PUKARE Plaintiff

HAREA-AVO Defendant

HAREA-AVO

Cross-claimant

JOHN PUKARE and

HENRY TOMANA

Cross-defendants

HENRY TOMANA

Second cross-claimant

NILANG-SAKO

Second cross-defendant

Form 2---Heading

Form 2.

O.2, rr.22, 23

HEADING.

In the National Court of Justice . . . No. . . . of 20 . . . , at . . .
Papua New Guinea

JOHN PUKARE and others

Plaintiffs

HAREA-AVO

Defendant

and Cross-claimant

Form 3---Heading where no Defendant

Form 3.

O.2, r.24

HEADING WHERE NO DEFENDANT.

In the National Court of Justice . . . No. . . . of 20\..., at . . .
Papua New Guinea . . . The application of HENRY TOMANA

Form 4---Conclusion of Documents

Form 4.

O.2, r.30

CONCLUSION OF DOCUMENTS.

(*Conclusion of documents for signature by a party unless otherwise
indicated or required*.)

(*Signature*)

Plaintiff\'s Solicitor. Filed

(dated *if not filed)*:

(*The address is not necessary because it must appear on the backsheet.
The appropriate alteration must be made where Order 2 Rule 27(2)
(relating to signature for a solicitor) applies.*

*See also Order 2 Division 3, generally.*)

Form 5---Writ of Summons

Form 5.

O.4, r.16

WRIT OF SUMMONS

In the National Court of Justice . . . W.S. No. . . . of 20\...,

BETWEEN: HAREA AVO

Plaintiff

AND: JOHN PUKARE

Defendant

THE INDEPENDENT STATE OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA

To JOHN PUKARE of (place)

The plaintiff makes a claim against you the nature of which is endorsed
on the back of this writ.

You are liable to suffer judgement or an order against you unless the
prescribed form of notice of your intention to defend this claim is
received in the Registry or a sub-registry within (30)\* days after
service\*\* of this writ of summons on you and you comply with the rules
of court relating to your defence.

(*Where Order 8 Rule 24 applies, add:* You are required to verify your
defence.)

WITNESS the Honourable E.F. Chief Justice of our National Court of
Justice at Waigani in the Independent State of Papua New Guinea the . .
. day of . . . 20\...

Registrar.

Note: This writ is to be served within 2 years from the date of its
issue.

The defendant(s) may give notice of his (their) intention to defend in
person or by a solicitor either ---

\(1\) by filing it in the appropriate form, duly completed, at the
Registry; or

\(2\) by sending it to that office by post.

(*Endorsements to be made on back of writ before issue*)

STATEMENT OF CLAIM

1\. (*plead as required by the Rules*)

2\. (*plead as required by the Rules*)

The . . . plaintiff . . . claims:

1\. (*specify the relief claimed*)

2\. (*specify the relief claimed*)

(*Particulars under Order 8, rr. 29-35 may be given by a heading, for
example:*

PARTICULARS OF INJURIES

1\. (*state the particulars of injuries*)

2\. (*state the particulars of injuries*)

*These particulars may appear in the relevant place in the statement of
facts or separately after the relief claimed, whichever is convenient.)*

*(Where appropriate insert the particulars required by Order 4, rr. 21
and 22.)*

*(If the plaintiff sues, or the defendant is sued, in a representative
capacity, this must be stated in the endorsement of claim. Where
appropriate, add words to satisfy Order 4 Rule 20.)*

(*Where Order 4 Rule 10 applies, add:* You may, within (30)\*\*\* days
after service of this writ of summons on you, pay to the plaintiff or
his solicitor the amount claimed (together with interest thereon at the
rate claimed (*if no rate is specified insert \"of 8%* yearly\") from
the due of filing of this writ until payment) and also K . . .\*\*\*\*
for costs. Further proceedings against you will be stayed when you also
file a prescribed form of notice of payment.)

(*Where Order 4 Rule 14(1)(a) applies, add:*

The plaintiff does not seek to disturb the occupation of (*name of
occupier*).)

(*Where Order 10 Rule 2 applies, add:*

Nominated place for trial: (*state a place appointed for sittings of the
Court*).)

Plaintiff: (*name, address and occupation*) (a minor)

(Next friend: (*name, address and occupation*))

Solicitor: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Solicitor\'s agent: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Plaintiff\'s address for service: (*Order 6 Rule 7*)

Address of Registry:

\*In a Writ for service out of the jurisdiction insert appropriate time.

\*\*If notice of the writ is to be served insert here \"of notice

\*\*\*If writ is to be served outside Papua New Guinea, insert the
appropriate time.

\*\*\*\*See Order 4 Rule 10.

Form 6---Originating Summons (Stating appointment for hearing)

Form 6.

O.4, r.26

ORIGINATING SUMMONS

(Stating appointment for hearing)

(*heading as in Form 1 or Form 3*)

The plaintiff claims---

### 1\. An order making provision for his maintenance, education and
advancement in life pursuant to (*Act*) out of the estate of (*name*)
late of (*place*) (*occupation*) deceased.

### 2\. An order that (*or as required*) (or)

### 1\. A declaration that

### 2\. An order that (*or as required*) (or)

The plaintiff claims an order that (*where there is defendant, add the
following-*

To the defendant:

If there is no attendance before the Court by you or by your counsel or
solicitor at the time and place specified below, the proceedings may be
heard and you will be liable to suffer judgement or an order against you
in your absence.

Before any attendance at that time you must give notice of your
intention to defend this claim.)

Time: . . . , 20\..., at . . . a.m./p.m.

Place: (*address of Court*)

(*Where the time for service under Order 4 Rule 26(3) has been abridged,
add* ---

The time before which this summons is to be served has been abridged by
the Court to. . . a.m./p.m. on . . . , 20\..., or as the case may
require).

(*Where there is no defendant, add* ---

Time and place for hearing

Time: . . . , 209\..., at . . . a.m./p.m.

Place: (*address of Court)*) continue ---

Plaintiff: (*name, address and occupation*) (a minor)

(Next friend: (*name, address and occupation*))

Solicitor: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Solicitor\'s agent: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Plaintiff\'s address for service: (*Order 6 Rule 7*)

Address of Registry:

(*Where there is a defendant, add ---*

Note: The defendant(s) may give notice of his (their) intention to
defend in person or by a solicitor either ---

\(1\) by filing it in the appropriate form, duly completed, at the
Registry; or

\(2\) by sending it to that office by post.)

Form 7---Originating Summons

Form 7.

O.4, r.27

ORIGINATING SUMMONS

(Hearing to be appointed)

(*heading as in Form 1 or Form 3*)

The plaintiff claims ---

*(state the relief claimed in the manner indicated in the form of
originating summons Form 6)*.

(*Where there is a defendant, add the following* ---

To the defendant:

You are liable to suffer judgement or an order against you unless the
prescribed form of intention to defend this claim is received in the
Registry within (30) days after service of this summons on you.)

Plaintiff: (*name, address and occupation*) (a minor)

(Next friend: (*name, address and occupation*))

Solicitor: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Solicitor\'s agent: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Plaintiff\'s address for service: (Order 6 Rule 7)

Address of Registry:

(*Where there is a defendant, add the following* ---

Note: The defendant(s) may give notice of his (their) intention to
defend in person or by a solicitor either ---

\(1\) by filing it in the appropriate form, duly completed, at the
Registry; or

\(2\) by sending it to that office by post.)

Form 8---Notice of Payment

Form 8.

O.4, r.10

NOTICE OF PAYMENT

On . . . , 20\..., the defendant paid to the plaintiff K . . . , made up
as follows:

amount claimed K

Costs K

(interest at the rate of . . .% from . . . , 20\..., until the K

above date of payment)

Total K

Form 9---Notice of Claim for Possession

Form 9.

O.4, r.14

NOTICE OF CLAIM FOR POSSESSION

To (*name of occupier*) of (*describe land*).

In the document served with this notice the plaintiff claims possession
of the above land. You are served as a person in occupation of it or of
part of it.

You may apply to the Court for an order that you be added as a
defendant.

If you do not so apply within (21) days after this notice is served on
you (*or, where Order 4 Rule 14(1)(b)(i) applies*, at or before the
appointment for hearing stated in the summons served with this notice)
you may be evicted from the above land pursuant to a judgement entered
in your absence.

Form 10---Appointment for Hearing

Form 10.

O.4, r.29

APPOINTMENT FOR HEARING

The Court appoints . . . , 20\..., at . . . a.m./p.m. at (address of
Court) for the hearing.

(*Signature and description*

*of Officer of the Court)*

Filed: . . . , 20\...

Form 11---Notice of Motion

Form 11.

O.4, r.40

NOTICE OF MOTION

(*heading as in Form 1 or Form 3*)

The plaintiff will at . . . a.m./p.m. on . . . , 20. . . , at (*address
of Court*) move the Court for orders ---

1\. (*state concisely the nature of each order which is sought but not
the grounds of the application*).

(*Where the time for service under Order 4 Rule 42, has been abridged,
add* ---

The time before which this notice of motion is to be served has been
abridged by the Court to . . . a.m./p.m. on . . . , 20. . . , *or as the
case may require*.)

(*Follow the prescribed form of conclusion of documents for use by a
party, Form 4*.)

To: (*name each Party affected by the above order sought*).

Form 12---Notice to be served outside Papua New Guinea in Lieu of Writ

Form 12.

O.6, r.20(5)

NOTICE TO BE SERVED OUTSIDE PAPUA NEW GUINEA IN LIEU OF WRIT

(*heading as in Form 1 or Form 3*)

To C.D. of

. . . A.B., of . . . , has commenced an action against you, C.D., in the
National Court of Justice by writ of summons of that Court dated the . .
. day of . . . 20\..., , which writ is endorsed as follows (*copy in
full the endorsements*) and you are required within . . . days after the
receipt of this notice, inclusive of the day of such receipt, to give
notice of your intention to defend the action; and, in default of your
so doing, the said A.B. may, by leave of the Court, proceed therein, and
judgement may be given in your absence.

You may give notice of your intention to defend the action either
personally or by your solicitor at the Registry of the Court at Waigani.

(*Signed*) A.B. of . . . &c.

S.Y. of . . . &c.

Solicitor of A.B.

n.b.--- This notice is to be used where the person to be served is not
within the Independent State of Papua New Guinea

Form 13---Request for special service

Form 13.

O.6, r.28

REQUEST FOR SPECIAL SERVICE

It is requested that the sealed copy of (*description of document*) be
served on (*name*) (whose address is . . . ) in . . . (*country*) by
(*describe special manner*).

(*Follow the prescribed form of conclusion of documents for use by a
party, Form 4 and, after the translation, add the certificate*.)

I (*name*), of (*address*), certify---

1\. That what appears above is a translation of the document annexed
and marked \"A\";

2\. That my qualifications to translate from the English language to
the (name) language are (state qualifications).

Dated . . . , 20\...

(*Signed*)

(*The annexure must bear a note in the same language*---\"This is the
annexure marked \"A\" referred to in my certificate dated . . . ,
20\...\")

Form 14---Request for service

Form 14.

O.6, r.28

REQUEST FOR SERVICE

To the Registrar:

I (*name*) request that a sealed copy of (*description of document*) be
transmitted to (*country*) for service on (*name*), of (*address*)
(pursuant to the . . . convention made between . . . and . . . ) and I
undertake to pay to you an amount equal to the sum of all expenses
incurred in consequence of this request.

Form 15---Notice of intention to defend

Form 15.

O.7, r.4

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO DEFEND

(*heading as in Form 1 or Form 3*)

HAREA AVO of (*address*) (*occupation*) intends to defend this action
(originating summons).

(He is a partner in the defendant firm.)

(He is a minor (mentally disordered person); his guardian at law is KORA
AVO.)

(*Where a defendant wishes to make a request under Order 7 Rule 5(3)
add:*

The Registrar is requested to deal with the copy (two copies) of this
notice under

Order 7\
Rule 5(3).)

(*Add other notices, for example, under Order 8 Rule 43, relating to
notice for pleadings.*)

Solicitor: (*name*)\
(*address*)\
telephone: (*number*)

Solicitor\'s agent: (*name*)\
(*address*)\
telephone: (*number*)

Address for service: (the office of his solicitor, *or as the case may
be: see Order 6 Rule 7.*

(Follow the prescribed form of conclusion of documents for use by a
party, Form 4.)

(*This notice may be added to a notice of motion of a person applying to
be added as a defendant, for example, under Order 5 Rule 8(3)*.)

Form 16---Defence

Form 16.

O.8, r.4

DEFENCE

(*Plead as required by the Rules, for example* ---

### 1\. The defendant denies etc.)\
(*or*)

(*where one of two or more defendants,*

DEFENCE OF HAREA-AVO

### 1\. This defendant denies etc.)

(*Follow the prescribed form of conclusion of documents for use by a
party, Form 4, and, where Order 8 Rule 24 applies, add:*

AFFIDAVIT

On . . . , 20. . . , I (*name*) of (*address*) (*occupation*) say on
oath:

### 1\. I am the defendant.

### 2\. The defence set out above is true in substance and in fact.

Sworn etc.)

(*For a defence to a cross-claim see the prescribed form of defence and
cross-claim, Form 20*.)

Form 17---Reply

Form 17.

O.8, r.5

REPLY

(*Plead as required by the Rules, and see Order 8 Rule 22, relating to
joinder of issue*.)

Form 18---Reply and Defence to Cross-Claim

Form 18.

O.8, r.5(2)

REPLY AND DEFENCE TO CROSS-CLAIM REPLY

(*Plead as required by the Rules*.)

DEFENCE TO CROSS-CLAIM

(Plead as required by the Rules.)

Form 19---Notice to plead facts

Form 19.

O.8, r.13(3)

NOTICE TO PLEAD FACTS

To the plaintiff (cross-defendant): The defendant (cross-claimant),
pursuant to Order 8 Rule 13(3) requires you (in respect of your
cross-claim) to plead the facts on which you rely.

Form 20---Defence and Cross-Claim Defence

Form 20.

O.8, r.39

No. . . . of 20\...

In the National Court of Justice at

. . . Papua New Guinea

JOHN PUKARE

Plaintiff

HAREA-AVO

Defendant

HAREA-AVO

Cross-claimant

JOHN PUKARE

Cross-defendant

DEFENCE AND CROSS-CLAIM DEFENCE

1\. (*plead as required by the Rules and see the prescribed form of
defence under Order 8 Rule 4*.)

2\. (*plead as required by the Rules and see the prescribed form of
defence under Order 8 Rule 4*.)

CROSS-CLAIM

The cross-claimant HAREA-AVO claims---

1\. (*specify the relief claimed*)

2\. (*specify the relief claimed*)

(*Particulars under Order 8 Division 2 may be given in the manner
indicated in the prescribed form of statement of claim, Form 5*.)

Form 21---Scond Cross-Claim

Form 21.

O.8, r.39

(*Read this form with Form 20*)

SECOND CROSS-CLAIM

1\. (*plead as required by the Rules including the facts required by
Order 8, rule 39(6)*.)

2\. (*plead as required by the Rules including the facts required by
Order 8, rule 39(6)*.)

The second cross-claimant HENRY TOMANA claims---

1\. (*specify the relief claimed*)

2\. (*specify the relief claimed*)

(*Particulars under Order 8 Division 2 may be given in the manner
indicated in the form of statement of claim, Order 8 Rule 39*.)

To NILANG-SAKO:

### 1\. You are liable to suffer judgement or an order against you unless
the prescribed form of notice of your notice of intention to defend is
received in the Registry within (30) days after service of this
statement of cross-claim on you and you comply with the rules of court
relating to your defence.

2\. (*Where Order 8 Rule 24 applies*, add: You are required to verify
your defence.)

3\. (*Where Order 4 Rule 10 applies*, add: You may, within (30) days
after service of this second cross-claim on you, pay to HENRY TOMANA or
his solicitor the amount claimed (together with interest thereon at the
rate claimed *(if no rate is specified, insert \"of 8% yearly\"*) from
the date of filing of this second cross-claim until payment and also K\*
for costs. Further proceedings against you will be stayed when you also
file a prescribed form of notice of payment.)

Second cross-claimant; (*name, address and occupation*)(a minor)

(Next friend: (*name, address and occupation*))

Solicitor: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Solicitor\'s agent: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Second cross-claimant\'s address for service; (*Order 6 Rule 7*)

Address of Registry:

(\* *See Order 4 Rule 10*)

Form 22---Notice for Pleadings

Form 22.

O.8, r.43

NOTICE FOR PLEADINGS

To (*name*) . . . (*name*) . . . requires you to serve on him, within
(3) days after service of this notice upon you, copies of all pleadings
(*or as the case may require*) filed before the filing of your
cross-claim.

Form 23---Notice of Amendments

Form 23.

O.8, r.56

NOTICE OF AMENDMENTS

The (*describe document*) was amended on . . . , 20\..., pursuant to an
order made on . . . , 20\..., (pursuant to Order . . . Rule . . . )
by---

omitting \". . . \"

(omitting \" . . . \" and inserting \". . . \")

(inserting \" . . . \")

Form 24---Notice of Deposit

Form 24.

O.8, r.71

NOTICE OF DEPOSIT

The defendant has paid (filed a security to pay) into Court K . . .

That sum is in answer to the cause of action (all the causes of action)
on which the plaintiff claims (and after taking into account this
defendant\'s cause of action (for (*specify*)) on his cross-claim).

*or*

Of that sum, K . . . is in answer to the cause of action for (*specify*)
on which the plaintiff claims (and after taking into account as above)
and K . . . is in answer to the cause of action for (*specify*) on which
the plaintiff claims (and after taking into account *as above)*.

Form 25---Notice of Withdrawal of Deposit

Form 25.

O.8, r.74

NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL OF DEPOSIT

Pursuant to leave granted by the Court on . . . , 20\..., the defendant
withdraws the deposit of K . . . *brought into Court* by him on . . . ,
20\...

Form 26---Notice of Acceptance

Form 26.

O.8, r.75(2)

NOTICE OF ACCEPTANCE

The plaintiff accepts K . . . brought into Court by the defendant, C.D.,
in satisfaction of the causes of action in answer to which it was so
brought in, as against C.D. (and abandons all his other causes of action
as against C.D.)(and abandons those causes of action as against the
defendants E.F. and G.H.).

Form 27---Notice of confirming Deposit

Form 27.

O.8, r.75(5)

NOTICE CONFIRMING DEPOSIT

The defendant confirms the notice dated . . . , 20\..., of deposit of K
. . . brought into Court before the beginning of the trial.

Form 28---Notice of Withdrawing Acceptance

Form 28.

O.8, r.77

NOTICE WITHDRAWING ACCEPTANCE

(Pursuant to leave granted by the Court on . . . 20\..., ) the plaintiff
withdraws his acceptance of money brought into Court by the defendant
(name) . . . , being the acceptance mentioned in the plaintiff\'s notice
of acceptance dated . . . , 20\...

Form 29---Security to pay into Court

Form 29.

O.8, r.81

SECURITY TO PAY INTO COURT

(*Name of authorized person under Order 8 Rule 81*) whose address for
service is . . . promises to the Registrar to pay K . . . into Court
according to the requirements of Order 8 Division 6 of the Rules.

Signed

*or*

The Common Seal\
(*and so on*)

Form 30---Notice for Discovery

Form 30.

O.9, r.1

NOTICE FOR DISCOVERY

To the Defendant:

The plaintiff requires you to give discovery of documents with (without)
verification within (15) days after service of this notice on you.

Form 31---List of Documents

Form 31.

O.9, r.6

LIST OF DOCUMENTS

Pursuant to notice filed (or order made) on . . . , 20\..., the
defendant says:

### 1\. The defendant has in his possession, custody or power, the documents
enumerated in Schedule 1.

### 2\. The documents enumerated in Part 2 of Schedule 1 are privileged from
production on the ground---

\(a\) as to documents numbered 4 to 7 inclusive, that (*state the
ground*);

\(b\) as to documents 8 and 9, that (*state the ground*).

### 3\. The defendant has had, but does not now have, in his possession,
custody or power, the document enumerated in Schedule 2.

4\. (a) document 10, referred to in Schedule 2 was last in the
defendant\'s possession, custody or power on (*state when*);

\(b\) (*state what has become of it)*; or

\(c\) to the best of the defendant\'s knowledge, information and
belief, (*state in whose possession, custody or power it is and where
it is*).

### 5\. To the best of the defendant\'s knowledge, information and belief
neither the defendant nor his solicitor nor any other person on his
behalf has now, or ever had, in his possession, custody or power, any
document relating to any matter in question between the plaintiff and
the defendant (t*o be altered according to the terms of any order made
under Order 9 Rule 5*), other than the documents enumerated in the said
Schedule 1 and 2.

(*Describe each document in the schedules as original or copy, see Order
9 Rule 31*.)

SCHEDULE 1.

Part 1. 1.

2 .

3\.

Part 2.

4\.

5 .

6 .

7 .

8 .

9\.

SCHEDULE 2.

10\.

(*Follow the prescribed form of conclusion of documents for use by a
party, Form 4*.)

AFFIDAVIT

On . . . , 20\..., I, . . . (name) . . . , say on oath---

### 1\. I and the defendant.

### 2\. The statements of fact made in Paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 of the
above list are true.

Sworn etc.

I certify that, according to my instructions, this list and the
statements in it are correct.

The documents enumerated in Part 1 of Schedule 1 may be inspected at
(*address*) . . . on . . . , 20\..., between (*specify time under Order
9 Rule 6*).

Defendant\'s Solicitor

Form 32---Notice to produce Documents

Form 32.

O.9, r.9

NOTICE TO PRODUCE DOCUMENTS

(*heading as in Form 1 or Form 3*)

The plaintiff (*or* defendant) requires you to produce for his
inspection the following documents referred to in your statement of
claim (or defence, or affidavit), dated the . . . . day of . . . 20\...

(*describe documents required)*

Dated the . . . day of . . . 20\...

To . . . Solicitor for . . .

(*Signature*)

Form 33---Notice of Appointment to inspect Documents

Form 33.

O.9, r.9

NOTICE OF APPOINTMENT TO INSPECT DOCUMENTS

(*heading as in Form 1 or Form 3*)

You can inspect the documents mentioned in your notice of the . . . day
of . . . 20\..., (except the deed numbered in that notice)

(*here set out particulars required by Order 9 Rule 9(3)(c) where
appropriate*)

at my office on . . . next the . . . instant between the hours of . . .
and . . . o\'clock. Dated the . . . day of . . . 20\...

To . . . Solicitor for . . .

(*Signature*)

within (15) days after service of this notice on each of them
respectively, the defendant C.D. is required to answer interrogatories
numbered 1 to 8 (and verify his answers) and the defendant E.F. is
required to answer interrogatories numbered 1 to 12 (and verify his
answers).

INTERROGATORIES

1\. (*state the question*)

2\. (*state the question*)

Form 34---Notice to answer Interrogatories

Form 34.

O.9, r.17

NOTICE TO ANSWER INTERROGATORIES

Within (15) days after service of this notice on each of them
respectively, the defendant C.D. is required to answer interrogatories
numbered 1 to 8(and verify his answers) and the defendant E.F. is
required to answer interrogatories numbered 1 to 12 (and verify his
answers).

INTERROGATORIES

1\. (*state the question*)

2\. (*state the question*)

Form 35---Statement in answer to Ineterrogatories

Form 35.

O.9, r.22

STATEMENT IN ANSWER TO INTERROGATORIES

The defendant C.D. answers the plaintiff\'s interrogatories specified in
notice filed on . . . , 20\..., as follows:

1A. (*State in full the interrogatory*.)

1B. (*State the answer*.)

2A. (*State in full the interrogatory*.)

2B. (a) The defendant objects to answer on the grounds of privilege;

\(b\) (*State the facts on which this objection is based.*)

(*Follow the prescribed form of conclusion of documents for use by a
party, Form 4*.)

358

Sch 1, Form 36, O.9, r.22

Form 36---Verified Statement in answer to Interrogatories

Form 36.

O.9, r.22

VERIFIED STATEMENT IN ANSWER TO INTERROGATORIES

The defendant E.F. Pty Ltd answers the plaintiff\'s interrogatories
specified in notice filed on . . . , 20. . . , as follows:

1A. (*State in full the interrogatory*.)

1B. (*State the answer*.)

2A. (*State in full the interrogatory*.)

2B. (a) The defendant objects to answer on the grounds of privilege;

\(b\) (State the facts on which this objection is based.)

(*Follow the prescribed form of conclusion of documents for use by a
party, Form 4*.)

AFFIDAVIT

On . . . , 20. . . , I (*name*) . . . , of (*address*) . . .
(*occupation*) . . . say on oath---

### 1\. I am the secretary of the defendant and am authorized to make this
affidavit on its behalf.

2\. (*The deponent should state which of the answers are true to his own
knowledge and which are true to the best of his knowledge, information
and belief based on his inquiries of officers of the company and others
and on his other investigations*.)

Sworn *etc*.

Form 37---Notice to admit Facts (and Authenticity of Documents)

Form 37.

O.9, r.35

NOTICE TO ADMIT FACTS (AND AUTHENTICITY OF DOCUMENTS)

To the Defendant:

The plaintiff requires you to admit for the purpose of these proceedings
only---

1\. (*state each fact*)

2\. (*state each fact*)

The plaintiff requires you to admit for the purpose of these proceedings
only the authenticity of the following documents---

1\. (*describe each document*)

2\. (*describe each document)*

If you do not, within 14 days after service of this notice on you, serve
a notice on the plaintiff disputing any fact (and the authenticity of
any document) above specified, that fact (and the authenticity of that
document) shall, for the purpose of these proceedings, be admitted by
you in favour of the plaintiff.

Form 38---Notice disputing Facts (and Authenticity of Documents)

Form 38.

O.9, r.35

NOTICE DISPUTING FACTS (AND AUTHENTICITY OF DOCUMENTS)

The defendant disputes the following facts specified in the plaintiffs
notice dated . . . , 20\...---

1\. (*state each fact*)

2\. (*state each fact*)

(The defendant disputes the authenticity of the following documents
which were specified in the plaintiff\'s notice (or list of documents)
dated . . . , 20\...---

1\. (*describe each document*)

2\. (*describe each document*)

(The defendant admits---

1\. (*state each fact or describe each document*))

2\. (*state each fact or describe each document*))

Form 39---Notice for Medical Examination

Form 39.

O.9, r.37

NOTICE FOR MEDICAL EXAMINATION

(*heading as in Form 1 or Form 3*)

You are requested to arrange for (*the person concerned*) to submit to a
medical examination by Dr. . . . (*name*) at . . . (*set out place and
time*).

(*Person concerned*) may have a doctor chosen by him (her) to attend the
examination. Please inform me if that is his (her) intention.

Dated the . . . day of . . . 20\... To . . . Solicitor for . . .

(*Signature*)

Form 40---Notice to set down for Trial

Form 40.

O.10, r.4

NOTICE TO SET DOWN FOR TRIAL

(*heading as in Form 1 or Form 3*)

The plaintiff requests that the proceedings be set down for trial at
(*state the place for trial as fixed by or under Order 10 Rule 2*)
generally (or for trial of the following issues: (state the issues)).

Form 41---Notice of Trial

Form 41.

O.10, r.9

NOTICE OF TRIAL

(*heading as in Form 1 or Form 3*)

This cause (*or* the issues in this . . . ordered to be tried or inquiry
for the assessment of damages in this . . . ) will be tried at Waigani
(*or as the case may be*) on (*date*)

Dated the . . . day of . . . 20\... Registrar.

To . . . , Defendant\'s Solicitor (*or as the case may be*).

Form 42---Order

Form 42.

O.11, r.2

ORDER

THE COURT ORDERS that---

### 1\. The Superintendent of . . . , shall have . . . (*name*), a prisoner,
before this Court to be examined as a witness and duly returned to
confinement.

### 2\. The first day on which he is required to have the prisoner before
the Court is . . . , 20. . . , at . . . a.m./p.m. at . . . (*address of
Court*).

(*Complete as in general form of minute of order under Order 12 Rule
18*.)

Form 43---Notice to produce

Form 43.

O.11, r.2

NOTICE TO PRODUCE

To the Plaintiff:

The defendant requires you to produce at the trial (*or otherwise
specify the occasion or place*) the following documents for the purpose
of evidence---

(*enumerate the documents or things*).

Form 44---Summons for Production

Form 44.

O.11, r.2

SUMMONS FOR PRODUCTION

To (*name*)

(*address*)

THE COURT ORDERS that you shall attend and produce this summons and the
documents and things described in the schedule---

\(a\) before (*the Court or as the case may be*);

\(b\) at (*address of Court or other place*);

\(c\) on . . . , 20\..., at . . . a.m./p.m. and until you are excused
from further attending; but---

\(i\) you need not attend or produce any document on any day unless
reasonable expenses have been paid or tendered to you; and

\(ii\) if you are not a party to these proceedings, instead of so
attending you may produce this summons and the documents and things
described in the schedule to a clerk of the Court at the above place
not later than the day before the first day on which you are required
to attend.

SCHEDULE

(*description*)

Dated . . . , 20\...

By the Court

(*Signature and description of Officer of the Court*)

Note: If you do not comply with this summons you may be arrested. Issued
at the request of . . . (*name*), the plaintiff\'s solicitor (*or as the
case may be*).

Form 45---Summons to give Evidence

Form 45.

O.11, r.2

SUMMONS TO GIVE EVIDENCE

To (*name*)

(*address*)

THE COURT ORDERS that you shall attend for the purpose of giving
evidence---

\(a\) before (the Court *or as the case may be*);

\(b\) at (*address of Court or place*);

\(c\) on . . . , 20\..., at . . . a.m./p.m. and until you are excused
from further attending;

but you need not attend on any day unless reasonable expenses have been
paid or tendered to you.

Dated . . . , 20\... By the Court

(*Signature and description of Officer of the Court*)

Note: If you do not comply with this summons you may be arrested. Issued
at the request of . . . (*name*), the plaintiff s solicitor (*or as the
case may be*).

Form 46---Summons for Production and to give Evidence

Form 46.

O.11, r.2

SUMMONS FOR PRODUCTION AND TO GIVE EVIDENCE

To (*name*)

(*address*)

THE COURT ORDERS that you shall attend and produce this summons and the
documents and things described in the schedule and attend for the
purpose of giving evidence---

\(a\) before (*the Court or as the case may be*);

\(b\) at (*address of Court or place*);

\(c\) on . . . , 20\..., at . . . a.m./p.m. and until you are excused
from further attending; but you need not attend or produce any document
on any day unless reasonable expenses have been paid or tendered to you.

SCHEDULE

(*description*)

Dated . . . , 20\...

By the Court

(*Signature and description of Officer of the Court*)

Note: If you do not comply with this summons you may be arrested. Issued
at the request of . . . (name), the plaintiff\'s solicitor (or as the
case may be).

Form 47---Order for Examination

Form 47.

O.11, r.8

ORDER FOR EXAMINATION

THE COURT ORDERS that . . . (*name*) of . . . (*address within the
State*) be examined on oath before . . . (name and address or describe
examiner).

(*Complete as in general form of minute of order Order 12 Rule 18*.)

Form 48---Order appointing Examiner the Court orders

Form 48.

O.11, r.8

ORDER APPOINTING EXAMINER

THE COURT ORDERS---

### 1\. That . . . (*name and address (or description*)) be appointed
examiner for the purpose of taking the examination on oath of a witness
. . . (*name*) of . . . (*address out of Papua New Guinea*) in
accordance with the Rules of this Court (but without the power to compel
a witness to attend, *if this is required by a convention*).

### 2\. That the party obtaining this order give to each other interested
party (7) days\' notice in writing of the date on which he proposes to
send the minute of this order to the examiner.

### 3\. That not less than (4) days after that notice has been given each
party shall give to the other the name of his agent at . . . (place) to
whom notices may be sent.

(*Complete as in general form of minute of order under Order 12 Rule
18*).

Form 49---Order

Form 49.

O.11, r.8

ORDER

THE COURT ORDERS that a letter of request be sent to the judicial
authorities of . . . (*country*) to take or cause to be taken the
evidence of . . . (*name*).

(*Complete as in general form of minute of order under Order 12 Rule
18*.)

Form 50---Affidavit

Form 50.

O.11, r.22

AFFIDAVIT

On . . . , 20\..., I . . . (*name, address and occupation*) say on
oath---

1\. 2.

Sworn at (*place*)

before me:

(*or*)

AFFIDAVIT

On . . . , 20\..., I . . . (*name, address and occupation*) and on . . .
, 20\..., I . . . (*name, address and occupation*) say on oath---

### 1\. We are the directors of etc.

### 2\. I, . . . (*name*) am a director of etc.

Sworn by (*name*)

at (*place*) before me:

Sworn by (*name*)

at (*place*) before me:

(*where Order 11 Rule 22(4) applies, It appearing to me that the
deponent is blind, I certify that this affidavit was read to him in my
presence and that he seemed to understand it.*

(*Signature*))

Form 51---Form of Judgment

Form 51.

FORM OF JUDGEMENT

O.12, r.17

1\. *General form of judgemen*t---

JUDGEMENT---

that---(*terms of the judgement, in numbered paragraphs, if necessary*).

This judgement takes effect on (*insert the date fixed by reference to
Order 12 Rule 3*).

By the Court Registrar

2\. *Terms of particular judgments*---

\(a\) *Damages to be assessed*

JUDGEMENT---

that the defendant is liable to the plaintiff for damages and for costs.

THE COURT ORDERS that the damages be assessed.

\(b\) *Debt or damages*

JUDGEMENT---

that the defendant pay to the plaintiff K . . . (*amount of debt of
damages*) and K . . . costs (or as the case may be).

\(c\) *Possession of land*

JUDGEMENT ---

### 1\. That the defendant give the plaintiff possession of the land
described in the schedule (but so as not to disturb the occupation of
(*name of occupier*)).

### 2\. That the defendant pay to the plaintiff K . . . costs (*or as the
case may be*).

SCHEDULE

(*Describe land*)

\(d\) *Detention of goods*

JUDGEMENT ---

that the defendant is liable to the plaintiff---

### 1\. For the value of (*or delivery to the plaintiff of*) the goods
described in the schedule;

2\. (*for damages*); and

3\. (for costs).

THE COURT ORDERS that the value of the goods (and the damages) be
assessed

SCHEDULE

(*Describe goods*)

(*In the above form, where judgement is entered by default under Order
12 Rule 29, omit the appropriate words in brackets according to whether
Rule 29(a) or (b) applies.*)

\(e\) *Detention of goods*

JUDGEMENT---

### 1\. That the defendant deliver to the plaintiff the goods described in
the schedule (or pay to the plaintiff K . . . the value of the goods
described in the schedule);

### 2\. That the defendant pay to the plaintiff K . . . damages; and

### 3\. That the defendant pay to the plaintiff K . . . costs (*or as the
case may be*).

SCHEDULE

(*Describe goods*)

O.12, r.18

Form 52---General form of Minute of Order

Form 52.

GENERAL FORM OF MINUTE OF ORDER

ORDER

THE COURT ORDERS that ---

1 .

2 .

3\.

Ordered . . . , 20\..., and entered . . . , 20\...

(Judge)

(*or* by the Court Registrar)

Form 53---Writ of Possession

Form 53.

O.13, r.3

WRIT OF POSSESSION

TO THE SHERIFF:

In respect of the judgement entered on . . . , 20\..., enter the land
described in the schedule and cause the plaintiff . . . (*name*) to have
vacant possession of it (but, so as not to disturb the occupation of . .
. (*name, description and extent of restriction as directed in the
judgement*)) (and levy on the property of . . . (*name*), which is
authorized to be taken in execution for---

*continue as in Writ for Levy of Property, Form 58*).

SCHEDULE

(*Describe the land as in the judgement.*)

Issued . . . , 20\...

By the Court

Registrar

Issued at the request of (the plaintiff . . . (*name and address*) or .
. . (*name*) of . . . (*address and telephone number*) solicitor for the
plaintiff . . . (*name and address*)).

(The defendant resides at . . . (*address*).)

Form 54---Writ of Specific Delivery

Form 54.

O.13, r.4

WRIT OF SPECIFIC DELIVERY

TO THE SHERIFF:

In respect of the judgement entered on . . . , 20\..., cause the goods
described in the schedule to be delivered to . . . (*name*) (and levy on
the property of . . . (*name*), which is authorized by law to be taken
in execution for---

*continue as in Writ for Levy of Property, Form 58*).

SCHEDULE

(*Describe the goods as in the judgement*.)

Issued . . . , 20\...

By the Court

Registrar

Issued at the request of (the plaintiff . . . (*name and address*) or .
. . (*name*) of . . . (*address and telephone number*) solicitor for the
plaintiff . . . (*name and address*)).

(The defendant resides at . . . (*address*).)

Form 55---Writ of Delivery

Form 55.

O.13, r.4

WRIT OF DELIVERY

TO THE SHERIFF:

In respect of the judgement entered on . . . , 20\..., cause the goods
described in the schedule to be delivered to . . . (*name*) and levy on
the property of . . . (*name*) which is authorized by law to be taken in
execution---

\(a\) if you cannot cause the goods to be so delivered, for K . . .
(*amount of value of goods assessed under the judgement*);

\(b\) for the amount payable under the judgement, being K . . .
(a*mount of damages*) on . . . , 20\...,

*continue as in Writ for Levy of Property, Form 58*)

\(c\) for K . . . being costs of this writ; and

\(d\) for your fees,

and pay the amount so levied other than your fees, to . . . (*name*) or
otherwise as the law may require.

SCHEDULE

(*Describe the goods as in the judgement*.)

Issued . . . , 20\...

By the Court

Registrar

Issued at the request of (the plaintiff . . . (*name and address*) or .
. . (*name*) of . . . (*address and telephone number*) solicitor for the
plaintiff . . . (*name and address*)).

(The defendant resides at . . . (*address*).)

Form 56---Minute of Order

Form 56.

O.13, r.7(2)

MINUTE OF ORDER

(*No heading or title: for subscribing to the minute of order*.)

To . . . (*name of corporation*) and . . . (*name of officer*):

If . . . (*name of corporation*) neglects to obey this order within the
time specified in the order (*disobeys this order, as the case may be*)
. . . (*name of officer*) and . . . (*name of corporation*) will be
liable to sequestration of property and . . . (*name of officer*) to
imprisonment.

Form 57---Order

Form 57.

O.13, r.13

ORDER

THE COURT ORDERS that---

### 1\. HENRY TOMANA of . . . (*address*) shall attend---

\(a\) before (the Registrar *or as the case may be*);

\(b\) at . . . (*address of Court or place*);

\(c\) on . . . , 20\..., at . . . a.m./p.m. and until he is excused
from further attending;

\(d\) for the purpose of being examined as to the question-

\(i\) whether any and, if so, what debts are owing to him; and

\(ii\) whether he has any and, if so, what other property or means of
satisfying the judgement or order by which he is bound;

\(iii\) as to the whereabouts of the goods which he is bound, pursuant
to the judgement which has been entered against him, to deliver to the
plaintiff, *or as the case may be*).

### 2\. HENRY TOMANA shall attend and produce all documents or things in his
possession, power or custody relating to those questions (and---*here
specify particular documents or things, if any*).

### 3\. He need not attend or produce any document on any day unless his
reasonable expenses have been paid or tendered to him.

(*Complete as in general form of minute or order under Order 12 Rule
18.*)

Form 58---Writ for Levy of Property

Form 58.

O.13, r.28

WRIT FOR LEVY OF PROPERTY

TO THE SHERIFF:

In respect of the judgement (order) entered on 1 March , 20\..., levy on
the property of . . . (*name*), which is authorized by law to be taken
in execution, for---

\(a\) the amount payable under the judgement (order) being K . . . on
. . . , 20\..., (plus interest at the yearly rate of . . . % on the
principal sum of K . . . from that date, that is K . . . daily),
subject to any payment in reduction thereof;

\(b\) K . . . being costs of this writ; and

\(c\) your fees,

and pay the amount so levied other than your fees, to . . . (*name*) or
otherwise as the law may require.

Issued . . . , 20\...

By the Court

Registrar

Issued at the request of the plaintiff . . . (*name and address*) (or .
. . (*name*) of . . . (*address and telephone number*) solicitor for the
plaintiff . . . (*name and address*).)

(The defendant resides at . . . (*address*).)

Form 59---Notice of Claim

Form 59.

O.13, r.36

(*Heading and title if possible*.)

NOTICE OF CLAIM

The claimant claims the property described in the schedule, being (part
of) the property taken (intended to be taken) in execution by the
Sheriff at . . . (*address*) under process against . . . (*name*).

SCHEDULE

(*description*)

Dated . . . , 20\...

(*Signature*)

Claimant\'s Solicitor

Claimant: . . . (*name*)

Place of abode:

Address for service:

To the execution creditor:

If you do not, within (4) days after service of this notice on you,
serve on the Sheriff a notice that you admit this claim, the Court may
on application by the Sheriff grant relief by way of interpleader.

If you admit the claim, you will not be liable to the Sheriff for any
fees or expenses incurred by him after you serve on him notice that you
admit it.

(*Signature*)

Sheriff

Form 60---Garnishee Notice

Form 60.

O.13, r.56

GARNISHEE NOTICE

### 1\. Particulars---

\(a\) Judgement creditor: . . . (*name, address and occupation*).

\(b\) Judgement debtor: . . . (*name, address and occupation*).

\(c\) Garnishee: . . . (*name, address and occupation*).

\(d\) Debt: . . . (*see Order 13 Rule 56(7)*).

\(e\) Leave granted on . . . , 20. . .

\(f\)

\(i\) amount due to judgement creditor at the date leave granted K

\(ii\) provision for subsequent interest and for costs K\
sum required K

### 2\. The debt is attached and bound in the hands of the garnishee to the
extent of the sum required on and after service of this notice on the
garnishee.

### 3\. The judgement creditor will at . . . a.m./p.m. on . . . , 20\..., at
. . . (*address of Court*) move the Court for an order for payment under
Order 13 of the Rules of Court.

### 4\. The garnishee may pay the debt attached into Court to the extent of
the sum required, retaining, if he pays into Court before . . . , 20. .
., K . . . for his costs. Otherwise the Court may order him to pay the
debt attached to the judgement creditor to the extent of the sum
required and interest thereon and costs.

### 5\. Provision exists for the determination at the hearing of any dispute
by the garnishee of his liability to the judgement debtor for the debt
attached.

(*Follow the prescribed form of conclusion of documents for use by a
party, Form 4, and add*---

The address for service of the judgement creditor is . . . (*address*).)

377

Sch 1, Form 61, O.13, r.71

Form 61---Order

Form 61.

O.13, r.71

ORDER

THE COURT ORDERS that---

### 1\. The judgement dated . . . , . . . , of the . . . (*court*) by which
it was adjudged that . . . (*name*) pay money to . . . (*name*) be
registered;

2\. . . . (*name*) may within . . . days after service on him of notice
of registration apply to set aside the registration;

### 3\. The amount for which judgement may be enforced is K . . .;

### 4\. The costs of and incidental to the application for this order and of
registration of the judgement be added to the amount specified in
Paragraph 3 of this order.

(*Complete as in general form of minute of order under Order 12 Rule
18*.)

Form 62---Notice of Registration of Judgment

Form 62.

O.13, r.73

NOTICE OF REGISTRATION OF JUDGEMENT

To: . . . (*name*)

### 1\. The judgement of . . . (*here follow the terms of the order*) has
been registered in this Court;

### 2\. The amount for which judgement may be enforced against you is K . .
. and K . . . for costs;

### 3\. You may, within . . . days after the service of this notice on you,
file notice of motion to set aside the registration;

(*if applicable and see Order 13 Rule 73(4)*,

### 4\. The address for service of the above plaintiff, the judgement
creditor, is . . . (*state address*).)

Dated . . . , 20\...

Solicitor for Plaintiff

Form 63---Deed Particulars

Form 63.

O.14, r.18

DEED

PARTICULARS

### 1\. Date: . . . , 20\...

### 2\. Receiver: . . . (*name*)\
(*address for service*)

### 3\. Guarantor: . . . (*name*)\
(*address for service*)

### 4\. Date of order for appointment of Receiver: . . . , 20. . . .

THIS DEED made between the Guarantor and the Registrar of the National
Court of Justice witnesses that the Guarantor promises the Registrar
that if the Receiver does not account to the Court for what he receives
as Receiver or does not deal with what he receives as Receiver as the
Court directs the Guarantor will pay to the Registrar whatever is
required to make good the default to a limit of K . . .

Signed (*and so on*).

Form 64---Warrant for arrest

Form 64.

O.14, r.46

WARRANT FOR ARREST

TO THE SHERIFF---

Arrest . . . (*name*) and bring him before the Court to answer a charge
of contempt detaining him in custody in the meantime unless, by paying
the sum of K . . . into Court (*or as the case may be*) he gives
security for his appearance in person before the Court to answer the
charge and to submit to the (judgement *or*) order of the Court.

Dated . . . , 20\...

Judge.

Form 65---Warrant for Committal

Form 65.

O.14, r.48

WARRANT FOR COMMITTAL

TO THE SHERIFF---

Take . . . (*name*) to . . . (*name of Correctional Institution*) and
deliver him to the Superintendent of that Corrective Institution.

TO THE SUPERINTENDENT OF . . . (*name of Correctional Institution*)

Receive . . . (*name*) into your custody and keep him there until the
further order of this Court (*or as the case may be*).

Dated . . . , 20\...

Judge.

Form 66---Notice of Appeal

Form 66.

O.18, r.2

(*heading as in Form 1 or Form 3*)

NOTICE OF APPEAL

The above-named appellant being aggrieved by a decision of a Local Court
hereby appeals from that decision to the National Court.

### 1\. The decision appealed against is the (decision/order/sentence) of
the Local Court held at . . . (*place*) given on . . . (*date*) whereby
(*set out*).

### 2\. The appellant appeals against the whole of the decision (that part
of the decision whereby (*set out*)).

### 3\. The grounds relied on in support of the appeal are (*set out*).

### 4\. The order which the appellant seeks in lieu of the decision appealed
from is (*set out*).

### 5\. The full names and addresses of the appellant and respondent
respectively are:

\(a\) . . . (*name and address*) Appellant

\(b\) . . . (*name and address*) Respondent

### 6\. The appellant\'s solicitor is . . . (*name and address*) whose
telephone number is . . . (set out).

Dated the . . . day of . . . 20\...

Appellant *or*

Appellant\'s Solicitor(s)

Form 67---Confirmation of Notice of Appeal

Form 67.

O.18, r.2

(*heading as in Form 1 or Form 3*)

CONFIRMATION OF NOTICE OF APPEAL

The above-named appellant hereby confirms the notice of appeal given by
him against a decision of a Local Court.

### 1\. The decision appealed against is the (decision/order/sentence) of
the Local Court held at . . . (*place*) given on . . . (*date*) whereby
(*set out*).

### 2\. Notice of appeal was lodged with the Registrar by radiogram on the .
. . day of . .

### 3\. The appellant appeals against the whole of the decision (that part
of the decision whereby (*set out*)).

### 4\. The grounds relied on in support of the appeal are (*set out*).

### 5\. The order which the appellant seeks in lieu of the decision appealed
from is (*set out*).

### 6\. The full names and addresses of the appellant and respondent
respectively are:

\(a\) . . . (*name and address*) Appellant

\(b\) . . . (*name and address*) Respondent

Dated the . . . day of . . . 20\...

Appellant *or*

Appellant\'s Solicitor(s)

Form 68---Application for Bail

Form 68.

O.18, r.4

(*heading as in Form 1 or Form 3*)

APPLICATION FOR BAIL

The above-named appellant hereby applies to the National Court to be
admitted to bail.

In the Local Court held at . . . (*place*) on . . . (*date*) the
appellant was found guilty of (*set out*) . . . and was sentenced to . .
. (*set out*) (and it was further ordered . . . (*set out*)).

The grounds of the application are as follows: (*set out*)

Notice of appeal against that decision of the Local Court was lodged
with the Registrar of the National Court on . . . (*date*).

Dated the . . . day of . . . 20\...

Applicant *or*

Applicant\'s Solicitor(s)

This application will be heard at the National Court at . . . on . . .
day the . . . day of . . . 20\..., at . . . o\'clock in the . . . noon
or as soon thereafter as counsel may be heard.

Registrar

Form 69---Notice of Hearing of Appeal

Form 69.

O.18, r.5

(*heading as in Form 1 or Form 3*)

NOTICE OF HEARING OF APPEAL

This appeal will be heard at the first sitting of the National Court at
. . . (*place*) to be held after the expiration of . . . (*number*) days
from . . . (*date*) or as soon thereafter as counsel may be heard.

Dated the . . . day of . . . 20\... Registrar.

Form 70---Summons

Form 70.

O.19, r.8

SUMMONS

(*As to heading, see O.19, r.3*)

The plaintiff . . . (*name*) the executor named in the will dated . . .
, 20\..., (*where applicable* and 2 codicils dated . . . (*date*) and .
. . (*date*)) of . . . (*name*) late of . . . (*place*) *labourer*
deceased claims that probate of the will . . . (*where applicable* . . .
and 2 codicils) be granted to him.

*or*

The plaintiff . . . (*name*) a beneficiary named in the will dated . . .
, 20\..., (where applicable and 2 codicils dated . . . (*date*) and . .
. (*date*)) of . . . (*name*) late of . . . (*place*) *labourer*
deceased claims that administration with the will (*where applicable*
and 2 codicils) annexed of the estate of the deceased be granted to him
(*where applicable* . . . (*name*) the executor named in the will having
renounced probate) (*where applicable* and that the administration bond
be dispensed with).

*or*

The plaintiff . . . (*name*) the widow of . . . (*name*) late of . . .
(*place*) *labourer* deceased claims that administration of the estate
of the deceased be granted to her (*where applicable* and that the
administration bond be dispensed with).

*or*

The plaintiff . . . (*name*) (*where applicable* as attorney of . . .
(*name*)) claims that probate of the will dated . . . , 20\..., (or,
*where applicable* letters of administration of the estate) of . . .
(*name*) late of . . . (*place*) *labourer* granted by . . .
(*description of court*) to . . . (*name*) be sealed with the seal of
this Court (*where applicable* and that the administration bond be
dispensed with).

Plaintiff: (*name, address and occupation*)

Solicitor: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Solicitor\'s agent: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Plaintiff\'s address for service: (*Order 6 Rule 7.*)

Filed: (*date*)

(*Signature*)

Plaintiff\'s Solicitor

Form 71---Notice of Intended Application for Probate

Form 71.

O.19, r.10

NOTICE OF INTENDED APPLICATION FOR PROBATE

In the National Court of Justice

After 14 days from publication of this notice an application for probate
of the will dated . . . , 20\..., (*where applicable*, and 2 codicils
dated . . . (*date*) and . . . (*date*)) of . . . (*name in capitals*)
late of . . . (*place*) . . . *labourer*, will be made by . . .
(*name*). Creditors are required to send particulars of their claims on
his estate to . . . (*name*) solicitors . . . (*address*) (and, *where
applicable*, or their agents, . . . *name, address*).

(*Form 4 does not apply*.)

Form 72---Notice of Intended Application for Administration

Form 72.

O.19, r.10

NOTICE OF INTENDED APPLICATION FOR ADMINISTRATION

In the National Court of Justice

After 14 days from publication of this notice an application for
administration (or where applicable administration with the will dated .
. . , 20\..., annexed) of the estate of . . . (*name in capitals*) . . .
late of . . . (*place*) . . . labourer, will be made by . . . (*name*)
the (*relationship to deceased or capacity of applicant*). Creditors are
required to send particulars of their claims on his estate to . . .
(*name*) solicitors . . . (*address*) (*and, where applicable*, or their
agents, . . . *name, address*).

(*Form 4 does not apply.)*

Form 73---Notice of Intended Application for Resealing

Form 73.

O.19, r.10

NOTICE OF INTENDED APPLICATION FOR RESEALING

In the National Court of Justice

After 14 days from publication of this notice an application will be
made that the probate of the will and codicils (*or where applicable*
letters of administration of the estate) of . . . (*name in capitals*)
late of . . . (*place*) . . . granted by . . . (*court*) . . . to . . .
(*name*) . . . be sealed with the seal of this Court. Creditors are
required to send particulars of their claims on his estate to . . .
(*name*) solicitors . . . (*address*)(*and, where applicable*, or their
agents, . . . *name, address*).

(*Form 4 does not apply*.)

Form 74---Renunciation of Probate

Form 74.

O.19, r.14

RENUNCIATION OF PROBATE

(*As to heading, see O.19, r.3.*)

I, . . . (*name*) . . . of . . . (*address of place of residence*) . . .
labourer declare---

### 1\. I am the executor (or one of the executors or *as the case may be*)
appointed by the will dated . . . , 20\..., (*where applicable*), and 2
codicils dated . . . (*date*) . . . and . . . (*date*) . . . of . . .
(*name*) . . . late of . . . (*place*) . . . labourer who died on . . .
(*date*).

### 2\. I have not intermeddled in the estate of the deceased.

### 3\. I renounce all right to probate of the will (*where applicable* and
codicils) and to all trusts, powers and authorities expressed by the
will (where applicable and codicils) to be made or given to me.

Dated: (*date*)

Signed in the presence of }

Form 75---Affidavit of Attesting Witness

Form 75.

O.19, r.15

AFFIDAVIT OF ATTESTING WITNESS

(*As to heading, see O.19, r.3*.)

On . . . , 20\..., I . . . (*name, address and occupation*) . . . say on
oath---

### 1\. On . . . (*date*) . . . the document annexed and marked \"A\" was
signed as now appears on the document by . . . (*name*) . . . the
deceased as his will in the presence of me and of . . . (*name of other
witness*) . . . present at the same time and then at the request of the
deceased attested and subscribed by us in his presence and in the
presence of each other.

### 2\. The signatures . . . (*set out*) . . . and . . . (*set out*) . . .
subscribed as witnesses to the will are respectively those of me and . .
. (*name of other witness*).

Sworn at }

before me }

Form 76---Affidavit of Death

Form 76.

O.19, rr.24,25,26

AFFIDAVIT OF DEATH

(*As to heading, see O.19, r.3.*)

On . . . , 20\..., I . . . (*name, address and occupation*) . . . say on
oath---

### 1\. I was well acquainted with . . . (*name of deceased*) late of . . .
(*place*). . . (*occupation*) for . . . (*number*) years.

### 2\. I saw his dead body on the day he died, that is to say, on . . .
(*date*).

### 3\. I am not interested in his estate.

*or in lieu of Paragraphs 2 and 3*

### 2\. I believe that he is . . . (*name in certificate of registration of
death*) referred to in the certificate of registration of death which is
annexed and marked \"A\" .

Sworn at }

before me }

Form 77---Affidavit of Executor

Form 77.

O.19, r.24

AFFIDAVIT OF EXECUTOR

(*As to heading, see O.19, r.3*.)

On . . . , 20\..., I . . . (*name, address and occupation*) say on
oath---

### 1\. My full residential address is (*address*).

### 2\. The document dated . . . (*date*) and signed in the margin by me and
by the person before whom this affidavit is sworn is, I believe, the
last will of . . . (*name*), the deceased.

### 3\. My means of identifying the will are (*state these*).

### 4\. I am the executor named in the will.

### 5\. The attesting witnesses to the will are . . . (*name*) and . . .
(*name*).

### 6\. The deceased did (*where applicable* not) marry after the will was
made. (*If he did marry state particulars of the marriage*.)

### 7\. The deceased left an estate within Papua New Guinea.

### 8\. I am over 21 years of age.

9\. (*where applicable*) . . . (*name*) one of the executors appointed
by the will died on . . . (*date*).

10\. (*where applicable*) . . . (*name*) one of the executors named in
the will renounced probate of the will on . . . (*date*).

### 11\. I believe that the estate is under the value of K . . . (*gross
value*).

Sworn at }

before me }

Form 78---Affidavit of Publication and Search

Form 78.

O.19, rr.24, 25, 26, 27.

AFFIDAVIT OF PUBLICATION AND SEARCH

(*As to heading, see O.19, r.3.*)

On . . . , 20\..., I . . . (*name, address and occupation*) say on
oath---

### 1\. A notice, a copy of which is annexed and marked \"A\", was published
on . . . (*date*) in the . . . (*name*) which is a daily newspaper,
circulating in Port Moresby.

2\. (*where applicable*) The notice was also published on . . . (*date*)
in the . . . (*name*) which is a newspaper published and circulating in
the district where . . . (*name*) the deceased, resided at the time of
his death.

### 3\. I have this day searched in the Registry of the Court and have
found-

\(a\) no evidence of a caveat having been lodged relating to any grant
or reseal being made in the estate of the deceased (*or state the
evidence*);

\(b\) no evidence of a will of the deceased having been deposited in
the Registry (*or state the evidence*); and

\(c\) (*where 2 years have elapsed since the date of death*) no
evidence of any prior application for probate or administration or
resealing in the estate having been made.

Sworn at }

before me }

Form 79---Oath of office

Form 79.

O.19, rr.24,25

OATH OF OFFICE

(*As to heading, see O.19, r.3*.)

I . . . (*name*) of . . . (*place*) *labourer* swear that if the
National Court of Justice grants to me . . . (*state the grant sought*)
of . . . (*name*) late of . . . (*place*) *labourer* I will well and
truly administer the estate of the deceased according to law and will
render a just and true account of the administration of it to the Court
within 12 months from the date of the grant.

Dated: . . . (*date*)

Sworn by: . . . (*name*) }at .

. . (*place*) }

before me: }

Form 80---Affidavit of Applicant for Administration

Form 80.

O.19, r.25

AFFIDAVIT OF APPLICANT FOR ADMINISTRATION

(*As to heading, see O.19, r.3*.)

On . . . , 20\..., I, . . . (*name, address and occupation*) say on
oath---

### 1\. My full residential address is . . . (*address*).

### 2\. I am . . . (*state relationship to deceased*) of . . . (*name*) late
of . . . (*place*) labourer who died on . . . (*date*).

### 3\. I believe that the deceased did not leave a will.

4\. (*State what searches have been made for a will*.)

5\. (*Where the deceased died without issue*.) The deceased was born
legitimate.

### 6\. The names, ages and relationship to the deceased of his next of kin
who survived him are (*state these*).

7\. (*State the facts showing that the persons named in Paragraph 6 are
the persons entitled to share in the estate and that no other person is
entitled. Annex appropriate marriage, birth, death and other
certificates*.)

8\. (*Where applicable state the matters referred to in Order 19 Rule
25(1)(b)(vii)*.)

### 9\. I am over 21 years of age.

### 10\. I am not an undischarged bankrupt and I have not assigned or
encumbered my interest in the estate.

### 11\. The deceased left an estate within Papua New Guinea.

### 12\. I am not aware of any claims against the estate (*where applicable*
other than those set out in the affidavit form \"D\" filed in these
proceedings).

### 13\. I believe that the estate is under the value of K . . . (*gross
value*).

Sworn at }

before me }

Form 81---Consent to Administration

Form 81.

O.19, r.25,33

CONSENT TO ADMINISTRATION

(*As to heading, see O.19, r.3*.)

I, . . . (*name*) of . . . (*place*) labourer am . . . (*state
relationship*) of . . . (name) late of . . . (*place*) *labourer*. I am
over 21 years of age. I am not an undischarged bankrupt and I have not
assigned or encumbered my interest in the estate of the deceased.

I consent to letters of administration being granted to . . . (*name*)
who is . . . (*state relationship*) of the deceased (*where applicable*
and to an administration bond being dispensed with).

Dated: . . . (*date*)

Signed in the presence of: }

AFFIDAVIT OF WITNESS TO CONSENT

On . . . , 20\..., I , . . . (*name, address and occupation*) say on
oath---

### 1\. The above document was signed in my presence on . . . (*date*) by .
. . (*name*).

### 2\. The signatures (*set these out*) are respectively my signature and
that of (*name of person consenting*).

Sworn at }

before me }

Form 82---Administration Bond

Form 82.

O.19, rr. 25, 26, 33

ADMINISTRATION BOND

(*As to heading, see O.19, r.3.*)

We (*state the name, address and occupation of the proposed
administrator and of each surety to the bond*) jointly and severally
covenant to pay to The State K . . . (*penalty of bond*) if
administration of the estate of . . . (*name*) late of . . . (*place*)
labourer deceased is granted by the National Court of Justice to the
said (*name of proposed administrator*) and any one or more of the
following occurs, namely:

### 1\. He does not collect, get in and administer the estate according to
law;

### 2\. He does not pay out of the estate the just debts of the deceased;

### 3\. He prefers any debt of the deceased to him;

### 4\. He does not file or file and pass his accounts relating to the
estate within 12 months after the grant and whenever ordered to do so by
the Court.

Dated: . . . (*date*)

Signed sealed and delivered *etc.*

Form 83---Affidavit of Surety

Form 83.

O.19, rr.25,26,33

AFFIDAVIT OF SURETY

(*As to heading, see O.19, r.3.*)

On . . . , 20\..., I, . . . (*name, address and occupation*) say on
oath---

### 1\. My full residential address is . . . (*state this*).

### 2\. I am one of the sureties for . . . (*name*) the intended
administrator of the estate of . . . (*name*) late of . . . (*place*)
*labourer*.

### 3\. I am possessed of property to the value of K . . . (*state value*)
after deduction of all my just debts and every sum for which I am bail
or surety in any civil or criminal matter, action or proceeding.

### 4\. My property consists of (*set out in detail the location and nature
of assets and whether held severally or jointly with any other person,
and state particulars of encumbrances*).

Sworn at }

before me }

Form 84---Affidavit of Applicant for Administration with the Will
Annexed

Form 84.

O.19, r.26

AFFIDAVIT OF APPLICANT FOR ADMINISTRATION WITH THE WILL ANNEXED

(*As to heading, see O.19, r.3*.)

On . . . , 20\..., I, . . . (*name, address and occupation*) say on
oath---

### 1\. My full residential address is (*state this*).

### 2\. The document, dated . . . (*date*) and signed in the margin by me
and the person before whom this affidavit is sworn is, I believe, the
last will of . . . (*name*), the deceased.

### 3\. My means of identifying the will are . . . (*state these*).

### 4\. The executor named in the will is . . . (*name*) and his full
residential address is . . . (*state this*).

### 5\. The attesting witnesses to the will are . . . (*name*) and . . .
(*name*).

### 6\. The deceased did (*where applicable* not) marry after the will was
made. (*If he did marry state particulars of the marriage*.)

### 7\. The deceased left an estate within the Independent State of Papua
New Guinea.

8\. (*Where applicable*) . . . (*name*), the executor named in the will,
died on . . . (*date*).

9\. (*Where applicable*) . . . (*name*), the executor named in the will,
renounced probate of the will on . . . (*date*).

### 10\. I am over 21 years of age.

### 11\. I am not an undischarged bankrupt and I have not assigned or
encumbered my interest in the estate.

### 12\. The names and ages of the persons entitled to share in the estate
are . . . (*state these*). (*Where the names of all the persons entitled
do not appear on the face of the will, state the facts showing that the
person named in this paragraph are entitled and that no other person is
entitled*.)

### 13\. I am not aware of any claims against the estate (*or as the case
may be*).

### 14\. I believe that the estate is under the value of K . . . (*gross
value*).

Sworn at }

before me}

Form 85---Renunciation in favour of Public Curator

Form 85.

O.19, r.26

RENUNCIATION IN FAVOUR OF PUBLIC CURATOR

(*As to heading, see O.19, r.3.*)

I, . . . (*name*) of . . . (*address of place of residence*) labourer
declare---

### 1\. I am the executor (or one of the executors or as the case may be)
appointed by will dated . . . , 20\..., (*where applicable* and 2
codicils dated . . . (*date*) and . . . (*date*) of . . . (*name*) late
of . . . (*place*) labourer who died on (*date)*).

### 2\. I have not intermeddled in the estate of the deceased.

### 3\. I renounce all right to probate of the will (*where applicable* and
codicils) and to all trusts, powers and authorities expressed by the
will (*where applicable* and codicils) to be made or given to me.

### 4\. I request the Public Curator to apply for administration with the
will (*where applicable* and codicils) annexed of the estate.

Dated: . . . (*date*)

Signed in the presence of

Form 86---Affidavit of Applicant for Resealing

Form 86.

O.19, r.27

AFFIDAVIT OF APPLICANT FOR RESEALING

(*As to heading, see O.19, r. 3*.)

On . . . , 20\..., I . . . (*name, address and occupation*) say on
oath---

### 1\. My full residential address is . . . (*state this*).

2\. . . . (*name*), the deceased, died at . . . (*place*) in the
Province of . . . (*state this*) on . . . (*date*).

### 3\. The deceased died intestate.

*or*

*The deceased left a will dated* . . . (*date*) by which he appointed me
(*or where applicable* (*name*)) sole executor of it.

### 4\. Probate of the will was (*or where applicable* letters of
administration of the estate of the deceased were) granted by . . .
(*name of court*) to me (*or where applicable to* . . . (*name*)) . . .
on . . . (*date*).

### 5\. The grant has not been revoked.

6\. (*Where applicable*) By power of attorney dated . . . (*date*) . . .
(*name*) appointed me his attorney to apply to this Court to reseal the
probate (or letters of administration).

7\. (*Where applicable*) I have not received any notice of revocation of
the power of attorney by death, unsoundness of mind, act of the donor or
otherwise.

### 8\. The deceased left an estate within the Independent State of Papua
New Guinea.

### 9\. I am over 21 years of age.

10\. (*Where applicable*) I am not aware of any claims against the
estate (*or as the case may be*).

Sworn at }

before me }

Form 87---Summons for Revocation

Form 87.

O.19, r.39

SUMMONS FOR REVOCATION

(*As to heading, see O.19, r.3.*)

The plaintiff claims that probate of the will (*or where applicable*
letters of administration) of . . . (*name*) late of . . . (*place*)
*labourer* granted to him on . . . (*date*) and numbered . . . (*number
of gran*t) be revoked.

Plaintiff: (*name, address and occupation*)

Solicitor: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Solicitor\'s agent: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Plaintiff\'s address for service: (*Order 6 Rule 7*)

Filed: (*date*)

(*Signature*)

Plaintiff\'s Solicitor

Form 88---Request for Issue of Citation

Form 88.

O.19, rr.45.

REQUEST FOR ISSUE OF CITATION

In the National Court of Justice at

Estate of (*name*)

late of (*place*) . . . (*occupation*)

I request that a citation do issue to each of (*name of each person to
be cited*) to take probate of the will dated . . . (*date*) (*or where
applicable* pray for administration of the estate) of . . . (*name*)
late of . . . (*place*) *labourer*.

(*Where applicable*) I request that the time limited for . . . (*name*)
to answer the citation be . . . (*number*) days after service on him of
the citation.

Person applying: (*name, address and occupation*)

Solicitor: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Solicitor\'s agent: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Filed: (*date*)

(*Signature*)

Solicitor for person applying

*or*

(*Title etc. as in originating process*)

I request that a citation to see these proceedings do issue to each of
(*name of each person to be cited*).

Party applying: (*name*)

Filed: (*date*)

(*Signature*)

Solicitor for party applying

Form 89---Summons to show Cause

Form 89.

O.19, r.49

SUMMONS TO SHOW CAUSE

(*Heading as in Form 71*)

To (*person summoned*)

You are required to appear before this Honourable Court at . . . on
Monday, . . . , 20\..., , to show cause why you should not bring into
Court (*or* why you (the executor) should not prove or renounce probate
of) the will of . . . (*name, address and occupation*) deceased who died
on . . . (*date*) at . . . (*place*) (*or* why administration with the
will annexed of the estate of . . . (*name, address and occupation*)
deceased, who died on . . . (*date*) at . . . (*place*) should not be
granted to . . . (*name, address and occupation*).

Dated the . . . day of . . . 20\...

Registrar.

Form 90---Citation to pray for Administration

Form 90.

O.19, r.50

CITATION TO PRAY FOR ADMINISTRATION

In the National Court of Justice at . . . Papua New Guinea

Estate of (*name*) late . . . of . . . (*place*) *labourer*

To (*name*)

This citation is issued at the request of . . . (*name*) of . . .
(*address*) *labourer* who has filed in this Court an affidavit by him
stating that?

1\. (*name*) . . . late of . . . (*place*) *labourer* died at . . .
(*place*) on . . . (*date*);

### 2\. He believes that the deceased died without leaving a will (*or where
applicable* he believes that the deceased left a will, a copy of which
is annexed and marked \"A\");

3\. (*where applicable*) no executor was appointed by the will (*or
where applicable* . . . (*name*) the executor appointed by the will has
renounced probate) (*or where applicable* . . . (*name*) the executor
appointed by the will died on . . . (*date*));

### 4\. He is (*state relationship to the deceased*) of the deceased (*or
where applicable* he is a beneficiary under the will) (*or where
applicable* he is a creditor of the deceased).

You are cited to pray for administration of the estate of the deceased.
If you wish to comply with this citation you must---

### 1\. Within 14 days after service on you of this citation (or if this
citation is served on you outside Papua New Guinea within 3 months after
service of it on you) file in the Registry of this Court an answer
stating that you intend to apply to the Court for a grant to you of
administration of the estate of the deceased; and

### 2\. With reasonable promptness commence proceedings in this Court for a
grant to you of administration of the estate of the deceased and pursue
those proceedings diligently.

If you do not comply with this citation the Court may grant
administration of the estate of the deceased to . . . (*name*) without
further notice to you in your absence.

Dated: (*date*)

By the Court

Registrar

Form 91---Answer to Citation to Pray for Administration

Form 91.

O.19, r.50

ANSWER TO CITATION TO PRAY FOR ADMINISTRATION

(*title etc. as in citation*)

I . . . (*name*) of . . . (*address*) *labourer* having been served on .
. . (*date*) at . . . (*place*) with a citation issued at the request of
. . . (*name*) and dated . . . (*date*) to pray for administration of
the estate of . . . (*name*) late of . . . (*place*) labourer answer
that I intend to apply to this Court for a grant to me of administration
of the estate of the deceased.

Solicitor for person cited: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Solicitor\'s agent: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Filed: (*date*)

(*Signature*)

Solicitor for the person cited

Form 92---Citation to take Probation

Form 92.

O.19, r.51

CITATION TO TAKE PROBATE

In the National Court of Justice at . . . Papua New Guinea

Estate of (*name*) late . . . of . . . (*place*) *labourer*

To (*name*)

This citation is issued at the request of . . . (*name*) of . . .
(*address*) *labourer* who has filed in the Court an affidavit by him
stating that---

1\. (*name*) . . . late of . . . (*place*) *labourer* died at . . .
(*place*) . . . on . . . (*date*);

### 2\. He believes that the deceased left a will, a copy of which is
annexed and marked\
\"A\", which appoints you the executor (*or* one of the executors) of
it;

### 3\. He is a beneficiary under the will (*or where applicable*) he is
(*state relationship to the deceased*) of the deceased (*or where
applicable* he is a creditor of the deceased).

You are cited to take probate of the will. If you wish to comply with
this citation you must---

### 1\. Within 14 days after service on you of this citation (or if this
citation is served\
on you outside Papua New Guinea within 3 months after service of it on
you) file in the Registry of this Court an answer stating that you
intend to apply to this Court for a grant to you of probate of the will;
and

### 2\. With reasonable promptness commence proceedings in this Court for a
grant to\
you of probate of the will and pursue those proceedings diligently.

If you do not comply with this citation your right in respect of the
executorship shall wholly cease, and the representation to the deceased
and the administration of his estate shall, without any further
renunciation, go, devolve, and be committed in like manner as if you had
not been appointed executor.

Dated: (*date*)

By . . . the . . . Court

Registrar

Form 93---Answer to Citation to take Probate

Form 93.

O.19, r.51

ANSWER TO CITATION TO TAKE PROBATE

(*title etc. as in citation*)

I . . . (*name*) of . . . (*address*) labourer having been served on . .
. (*date*) at . . . (*place*) with a citation issued at the request of .
. . (*name*) and dated . . . (*date*) to take probate of the will, a
copy of which is annexed to the citation, of . . . (*name*) late of . .
. (*place*) labourer answer that I intend to apply to this Court for a
grant to me of probate of the will.

Solicitor for person cited: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Solicitor\'s agent: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Filed: (*date*)

(*Signature*)

Solicitor for the person cited

Form 94---Citation to see Proceedings

Form 94.

O.19, r.52

CITATION TO SEE PROCEEDINGS

(*title etc. as in originating process*)

To (*name*)

This citation is issued at the request of . . . (*name*) of . . .
(*address*) labourer who is the plaintiff (*or where applicable a
defendant*) in proceedings commenced in this Court by writ of summons
(*or where applicable* originating summons). A copy of the writ of
summons (*or where applicable* originating summons) is annexed and
marked \"A\".

(*Where a will is referred to in the writ of summons or originating
summons*) A copy of the will referred to in the writ of summons (*or
where applicable* originating summons) is annexed and marked \"B\".

The plaintiff has filed an affidavit stating that you have an interest
adverse to him in the proceedings in that (*state the adverse
interest*).

If you do not answer this citation by giving notice of your intention to
defend the proceedings before the proceedings are heard and determined,
the Court may hear and determine the proceedings in your absence with
such consequence as may ensue according to law.

Dated: (*date*)

By the Court Registrar

Form 95---Caveat

Form 95.

O.19, r.60

CAVEAT

In the National Court of Justice

Estate of (*name*) late . . . of . . . (*place*) *labourer*

I demand that no grant or reseal be made in the estate of . . . (*name*)
late of . . . (*place*) *labourer* without prior notice to me.

late of . . . (*place*) labourer without prior notice to me

My interest is (*state this*).

Caveator: (*name, address and occupation*)

Solicitor: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Solicitor\'s agent: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Caveator\'s address for service: (*Order 6 Rule 7*)

Lodged: (*date*)

(*Signature*)

Caveator\'s Solicitor

Form 96---Caveat

Form 96.

O.19, r.61

CAVEAT

In the National Court of Justice

Estate of (*name*) late . . . of . . . (*place*) *labourer*

I require that any will (*or where applicable* the will dated (*date*)
*or otherwise identify the will*) of . . . (*name*) late of . . .
(*place*) *labourer* be proved in solemn form.

My interest is (*state this*).

Caveator: (*name, address and occupation*)

Solicitor: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Solicitor\'s agent: (*name, address and telephone number*)

Caveator\'s address for service: (*Order 6 Rule 7)*

Lodged: (*date*)

(*Signature*)

Caveator\'s Solicitor

Form 97---Inventory

Form 97.

O.19, r.72

INVENTORY

(*As to heading, see O.19, r.3*.)

Inventory of Estate of Deceased

Particulars of Property Estimated Value K

. . . :

(*set out under appropriate headings similar to*\
*the following*)

Cash in hand

Cash at Bank

Machinery

Stock in trade

Growing crops and farm stock

Household furniture

Personal effects

Motor vehicles

less H.P. agreements

Stocks, shares and bonds

Securities

Mortgages

Matrimonial home

Other freehold property

Other leasehold property

Total value K . . . :

(*Signature . . . of . . . Executor*\
*Administrator*)

Form 98---Affidavit verifying Inventory

Form 98.

O.19, r.72

AFFIDAVIT VERIFYING INVENTORY

(*As to heading, see O.19, r.3*.)

On . . . , 20\..., I (*name, address and occupation*) say on oath---

### 1\. The paper writing hereto annexed marked \"A\" is a true inventory of
all and singular the real and personal estate and effects of A.B., late
of . . . , deceased, who died on or about . . . , at . . . , which have
at any time since his death come to the hands, possession, or knowledge
of me, C.D. (*or* us, C.D. and E.F. (and G.H.)), the executor (*or*
executors) of the will (*or* administrator (or administrators) with the
will of the personal estate) of the said A.B. (*or* administrator (*or*
. . . administrators) of the (real and) personal estate of the said A.B.
(*or as the case may be*)), or to the hands or possession of any person
for me (*or* us or any (*or* either) of us), and is made upon and by
virtue of the undertaking contained in my (*or* our) petition filed on .
. .

### 2\. And I (*or* we, each speaking positively for himself and to the best
of his\
knowledge and belief as to other persons,) further say that, except as
appears in the said paper writing no (real or) personal estate of or
belonging to the said deceased has at any time since his death come to
my (*or* our) hands, possession, or knowledge, or the hands or
possession of (any (*or* either) of us or) any person for me (*or* us or
any (*or* either) of us).

(*In the case of two or more executors, use the words in brackets.*)

Form 99---Administration Account

Form 99.

O.19, r.73

ADMINISTRATION ACCOUNT

(*As to heading, see O.19, r.3*)

ACCOUNT OF EXECUTOR(S), (ADMINISTRATOR(S)), (TRUSTEE(S))

**Date Particulars Corpus Income Bank Date Particulars Corpus Income
Bank**

**K K K K K K**

**Totals K K K Totals K K K**

(SIGNATURE) (DATE)

Form 100---Affidavit veryfying Account

Form 100.

O.19, r.73

AFFIDAVIT VERIFYING ACCOUNT

(*As to heading, see O.19, r.3*.)

On . . . , 20\..., I . . . (*name, address and occupation*) say on
oath---

### 1\. I am the executor of the will (or administrator of the estate) of
A.B. late of . . . (*address*), deceased.

### 2\. The said A.B. died on (or on or about) the . . . day of . . . 20\...

### 3\. On the . . . day of . . . 20\..., probate of the said will
(administration of the estate of the said A.B.) was granted to me as
such executor (administrator) by this Honourable Court.

### 4\. Annexed hereto and marked with the letter \"A\" is a true account of
my administration of the estate of the said A.B. which has come into my
hands or into the hands of any person on my behalf or for my use.

Form 101---Notice of Filing of Accounts

Form 101.

O.19, r.76

NOTICE OF FILING OF ACCOUNTS

In the National Court of Justice

Accounts in the estate of . . . (*name in capitals*) late of . . .
(*place*) *labourer* have been filed in the Registry of the Court and
are there available for inspection. The executor (*or* administrator or
*as the case may be*) seeks an order passing the accounts (*where
applicable* and an order for commission) and has obtained for this
purpose an appointment to vouch the accounts before an accounts clerk of
the Court on . . . (*date*) at . . . (*time*). Any person interested may
attend.

Form 102---Summons

Form 102.

O.20, r.6

SUMMONS

The plaintiff claims an order for the adoption of . . . (name) in favour
of . . . (name) and . . . (name).

PARTICULARS

CHILD APPLICANT(S)

(surname) (surname)

(other names) (other names) (sex)

(occupation) Born . .

. , 19\... (address)

at . . . (place) AND

Father: (surname) (surname)

(other names) (other names)

Mother: (maiden surname) (occupation)

(other names) (address)

Time and place for hearing

Time: . . . , 20\..., at . . . a.m./p.m.

Place: (address of Court)

Plaintiff: (name, address and occupation)

Solicitor: (name, address and telephone number)

Solicitor\'s agent: (name, address and telephone number)

Plaintiff\'s address for service: (Order 6 Rule 7)

Address of Registry: (set out)

(where applicable,

The plaintiff requests that this application be dealt with by the Court
in the absence of the public without any attendance by or on behalf of
the plaintiff or applicant.)

Form 103---Notice of Application for Adoption Order

Form 103.

O.20, r.7

(*Heading but no title*)

NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR ADOPTION ORDER

To (*name and address*)

An application has been made for an order for the adoption of . . .
(*name of child)*.

If there is no attendance by you or by your counsel or solicitor at the
time and place specified below such order may be made in your absence as
the Court may think fit.

Time: . . . , 20\..., at . . . a.m./p.m.

Place: (*address of Court*)

Address of Registry:

Form 104---Adoption Order

Form 104.

O.20, r.13

ADOPTION ORDER

CHILD ADOPTING PARENTS

Surname Surname

Forenames Other names

(*sex*) (*occupation*)

Born . . . , 19\.... (*address*)

at . . . (*place*) AND

Father\'s surname Surname

Other names Other names

Mother\'s maiden surname (*occupation*)

Other names (*address*)

THE COURT MAKES AN ORDER for the adoption of the child in favour of the
adopting parents and approves the name(s) . . . as the forename(s) of
the child.

(*Where section 30(2) of the Adoption of Children Act applies add-*

THE COURT ORDERS that the child shall have the surname . . . .)

(*Complete as in the general form of minute of order under Order 12 Rule
18*.)

Form 105---Writ of Summons in Acton in Rem issued out of Admiralty
Registry

Form 105.

O.21, r.3

WRIT OF SUMMONS IN ACTION IN REM ISSUED OUT OF ADMIRALTY REGISTRY

In the National Court of Justice No. . . . of 20\...

Admiralty action in rem against:

(The ship \"TAHUA\" *or as may be describing the res*)

(The owners of the ship \"MALILA\" *or as may be*)

Plaintiffs

*and*

(The owners of the ship \"Tahua\" *or as may be describing the res*)

Defendants

THE INDEPENDENT STATE OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA

To the (owners of and other) persons interested in the ship . . . of the
port of . . . (*or cargo, etc., as may be*).

We command you that within 14 days after the service of this writ,
inclusive of the day of service, you do cause an appearance to be
entered for you in an action at the suit of . . . and take notice that
in default of your so doing the plaintiffs may proceed therein, and
judgement may be given in your absence, and if the res described in this
writ is then under arrest of the Court it may be sold by order of the
Court.

WITNESS the Honourable N.P. Chief Justice of our National Court of
Justice at Waigani in the Independent State of Papua New Guinea the . .
. day of . . . 20\...

Registrar

Note: This writ may not be served later than two (2) years beginning
with the above date unless renewed by order of the Court.

DIRECTIONS FOR ENTERING NOTICE OF INTENTION TO DEFEND

The defendant(s) may give notice of his/their intention to defend in
person or by a solicitor either---

\(1\) by filing it in the appropriate form, duly completed, at the
Registry,

\(2\) by sending it to that office by post.

*Endorsements to be made on writ before issue*

*Endorsement of claim*

The plaintiff\'s claim is for . . .

(*If the plaintiffs sue, or the defendants are sued, in a representative
capacity, this must be stated in the endorsement of claim.*)

*Endorsement as to solicitor and address*

This writ was issued by . . . of . . . Solicitor for the said plaintiffs
whose address is . . . (*or* This writ was issued by . . . of . . .
agent for . . . of . . . Solicitor for the said plaintiffs whose address
is . . . ) (*or* This writ was issued by the said plaintiffs who reside
at . . . and (*if the plaintiffs do not reside within the jurisdiction*)
whose address for service is . . . ).

*Endorsement as to service*

This writ was served by me at . . . on . . . on . . . the . . . day of .
. . 20\..., by (*stating manner of service*).

(Signed)

(address)

Form 106---Warrant of Arrest

Form 106.

O.21, r.5(1)

WARRANT OF ARREST

(*heading as in Form 105*)

THE INDEPENDENT STATE OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA

To the Admiralty Marshal of our National Court of Justice and to all and
singular his substitutes, Greeting. We hereby command you to arrest the
ship . . . of the port of . . . (and the cargo now or lately laden
therein, together with the freight due for the transportation thereof,)
or (and the freight due for the transportation of the cargo now or
lately laden therein,) and to keep the same under safe arrest until you
shall receive further orders from us.

WITNESS (*as in Form 105*)

The plaintiffs\' claim is for (*copy from the writ*)

Taken out by . . . (Solicitors for) the . . .

*Marshal\'s endorsement as to service*

Form 107---Praecipe for Warrant of Arrest

Form 107.

O.21, r.5(3)

PRAECIPE FOR WARRANT OF ARREST

(*heading as in Form 105*)

We . . . of . . . (Solicitors for) the plaintiffs request a warrant to
arrest (*description of property giving name, if a ship*).

Dated the . . . day of . . . 20\...

(Signed)

Form 108---Praecipe for Caveat against arrest

Form 108.

O.21, r.6

PRAECIPE FOR CAVEAT AGAINST ARREST

(*Description of property giving name, if a ship*)

We . . . of . . . Solicitors for . . . of . . . request a caveat against
the arrest of (*description of property giving name, if a ship*) and
hereby undertake to enter a notice of intention to defend in any action
that may be begun in the National Court of Justice against the said . .
. and, within 3 days after receiving notice that such an action has been
begun, to give bail in the action in a sum not exceeding K . . . or to
pay that sum into court. We consent that the writ of summons and any
other document in the action may be left for us at . . . .

Dated the . . . day of . . . 20\...

(Signed)

Form 109---Praecipe for service of Writ in Rem by Marshal

Form 109.

O.21, r.8(3)

PRAECIPE FOR SERVICE OF WRIT IN REM BY MARSHAL

(*heading as in Form 105*)

We . . . of . . . (Solicitors for) the plaintiffs request that the writ
of summons left herewith be duly served on . . .

Dated the . . . day of . . . 20\...

(Signed)

Form 110---Release

Form 110.

O.21, r.13(1)

RELEASE

(*heading as in Form 105*)

THE INDEPENDENT STATE OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA

To the Admiralty Marshal of our National Court of Justice, and to all
and singular his substitutes, Greeting.

Whereas in this action we did command you to arrest the . . . and to
keep the same under safe arrest until you should receive further orders
from us. Now we do hereby command you to release the said . . . from the
arrest effected by virtue of our warrant in this action.

WITNESS (*as in Form 105*).

Taken out by . . . (Solicitors for) the . . .

*Marshal\'s endorsement*

On . . . the . . . day of . . . 20\..., the . . . was released from
arrest pursuant to this Instrument.

(Signed)

Admiralty Marshal (Substitute)

Form 111---Praecipe for Issue of Release

Form 111.

O.21, r.13(5)

PRAECIPE FOR ISSUE OF RELEASE

(*heading as in Form 105*)

We . . . of . . . (Solicitors for) the plaintiffs (or defendants) in
this action against . . . (*description of property giving name, if a
ship*) . . . , now under arrest by virtue of a warrant issued out of the
Admiralty Registry, request the issue of a release with respect to the
said . . .

Dated the . . . day of . . . 20\...

(Signed)

Form 112---Praecipe for Caveat against Release and Payment

Form 112.

O.21, r.14

PRAECIPE FOR CAVEAT AGAINST RELEASE AND PAYMENT

(*Description of property giving name, if a ship*)

We . . . of . . . (Solicitors for) . . . of . . . request a caveat
against the issue of a release with respect to (*description of property
giving name, if a ship*) now under arrest and, should the said property
be sold by order of the Court, a Caveat against payment out of Court of
the proceeds of sale.

The intending caveator claims to have an interest (to the extent of
approximately K . . . if known) in the above-mentioned property in
respect of (*state nature of claim, e.g. salvage, collision damage
etc*.).

Dated the . . . day of . . . 20\...

(Signed)

Form 113---Praecipe for Withdrawal of Caveat

Form 113.

O.21, r.15

PRAECIPE FOR WITHDRAWAL OF CAVEAT

(*Description of property giving name, if a ship*)

We . . . of . . . (Solicitors for) . . . of . . . request that the
caveat *(state nature of caveat*) entered on the . . . day of . . .
20\..., on behalf of . . . be withdrawn.

Dated the . . . day of . . . 20\...

(Signed)

Form 114---Bail Bond

Form 114.

O.21, r.16

BAIL BOND

(*heading as in Form 105*)

WHEREAS this Admiralty action in rem against the above-mentioned
property is pending in the National Court of Justice and the parties to
the said action are the above-mentioned plaintiffs and defendants:

NOW, THEREFORE, WE, A.B. of . . . and C.D. of . . . hereby jointly and
severally submit ourselves to the jurisdiction of the said Court and
consent that if they, the above-mentioned defendants (or plaintiffs, *in
the case of a counterclaim*) do not pay what may be adjudged against
them in this action, with costs, or do not pay any sum due to be paid by
them in consequence of any admission of liability therein or under any
agreement by which this action is settled before judgement and which is
filed in the said Court, execution may issue against us, our executors
or administrators, goods and chattels, for the amount unpaid or an
amount of K . . . whichever is the less.

(Signed)

This bail bond was signed by the said A.B. and C.D., the sureties, the .
. . day of . . . 20\... Before me . . .

A Commissioner for Oaths

Form 115---Praecipe for Commission for Appraisement and Sale

Form 115.

O.21, r.23

PRAECIPE FOR COMMISSION FOR APPRAISEMENT AND SALE

(*heading as in Form 105*)

We . . . of . . . (Solicitors for) the plaintiffs (or defendants)
request a commission for the appraisement and sale of . . .
(*description of property giving name, if a ship*) which was ordered by
the Court on the . . . day of . . . 20\...

Dated the . . . day of . . . 20\...

(Signed)

Form 116---Commission for Appraisement and Sale

Form 116.

O.21, r.23

COMMISSION FOR APPRAISEMENT AND SALE

(*heading as in Form 105*)

THE INDEPENDENT STATE OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA

To the Admiralty Marshal of our National Court of Justice, and to all
singular his substitutes, Greeting:

WHEREAS in this action the Court has ordered (*description of property
giving name, if a ship*) to be appraised and sold,

WE hereby authorize and command you to choose one or more experienced
persons and to swear him or them to appraise the said . . . according to
the true value thereof, and such value having been certified in writing
by him or them to cause the said . . . to be sold by (*private treaty*)
(*public auction*) for the highest price that can be obtained for it,
but not for less than the appraised value unless the Court on your
application allows it to be sold for less.

AND WE further command you, immediately on the sale being completed, to
pay the proceeds thereof into Court and to file the certificate of
appraisement signed by you and the appraiser or appraisers, and an
account of the sale signed by you, together with this commission.

WITNESS (*as in Form 105*.)

Taken out by . . . (Solicitors for) the . . .

Form 117---Release and Warrant of Possession

Form 117.

O.21, r.13

RELEASE AND WARRANT OF POSSESSION

(*heading as in Form 105*)

THE INDEPENDENT STATE OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA

To the Admiralty Marshal of our National Court of Justice, and to all
and singular his substitutes, Greeting:

WHEREAS in this action the Court has ordered possession of the ship
(*name to be stated*), her tackle, apparel and furniture to be delivered
up to . . . or to his solicitor for his use,

WE hereby command you to release the said ship, her tackle, apparel and
furniture from the arrest made by virtue of our warrant in that behalf
and to deliver possession thereof to the said . . . or to his solicitor
for his use.

WITNESS (*as in Form 105*).

Taken out by . . . (Solicitor for) the . . .

*Marshal\'s endorsement*

On the . . . day of . . . 20\..., the ship was released from arrest
pursuant to this warrant.

(Signed)

Admiralty Marshal (Substitute)

*Receipt*

Received from the Admiralty Marshal (Substitute) on the . . . day of . .
. 20\..., the ship . . . and everything on board belonging to her.

(Signed)

Form 118---Notice to Consular Officer of Intention to Apply for Warrant
of Arrest

Form 118.

O.21, r.5(10)

NOTICE TO CONSULAR OFFICER OF INTENTION TO APPLY FOR WARRANT OF ARREST

(*heading as in Form 105*)

To the Consular Officer . . . (*name of State*)

The . . . (*state nationality*) ship . . . (*name*)

TAKE NOTICE that as solicitors for . . . (*name or description of
plaintiff as in writ*) we did on the . . . day of . . . 20\..., (*or* we
intend to) institute proceedings in the Admiralty Court of the National
Court of Justice against the above-named ship in respect of a claim by .
. . (*name or description of plaintiff*) for . . . (*state nature of
claim as indorsed on writ*) and that we intend to apply to the Admiralty
Court to arrest the said ship.

Dated this . . . day of . . . 20\...

(Signed)

Solicitors for the Plaintiff

Form 119---Notice directed by Court of Adjourned Application for Writ of
Habeas Corpus

Form 119.

O.17, r.2

NOTICE DIRECTED BY COURT OF ADJOURNED APPLICATION FOR WRIT OF HABEAS
CORPUS

(*Heading as in Form 1 or 3*)

Take notice that an application for the above writ was made to the
Honourable Mr. Justice . . . in the above matter on the . . . day of . .
. 20\..., when the said application was adjourned until . . . a.m./p.m.
on the . . . day of . . . 20\..., so that notice could be given to you.

Date the . . . day of . . . 20\...

(Signed)

of

(Solicitor for)

To . . .

Solicitor for . . .

Form 120---Writ of Habeas Corpus

Form 120.

O.17, r.9

WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS

(*Heading as in Form 5*)

THE INDEPENDENT STATE OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA

To the Superintendent of the Corrective Institution, Greeting:

I command you that you have brought within the National Court of Justice
(or before a judge in chambers) at . . . , on the day and at the time
specified in the notice served with this writ, the body of A.B. being
taken and detained under your custody as is said, together with the day
and cause of his being taken and detained, by whatsoever name he may be
called therein, that the Court (*or* Judge) may then and there examine
and determine whether such cause is legal.

(*Same as in Form 5*)

(Signed) *Endorsement*

By order of Court (*or of Mr. Justice* . . . ).

This writ was issued by . . . of . . . Solicitor

for . . .

Form 121---Notice to be Served with Writ of Habeas Corpus

Form 121.

O.17, r.6

NOTICE TO BE SERVED WITH WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS

In the National Court of Justice

(*If in a cause already begun, here insert the title, not otherwise*)

Whereas this Court (*or* the Honourable Mr. Justice . . . ) has granted
a writ of habeas corpus directed to . . . (*or* other person having the
custody of . . . *if so*) commanding him to have the body of A.B. before
the said Court (or before a judge in chambers) at . . . , on the day and
at the time specified in the notice together with the day and cause of
his being taken and detained.

Take notice that you are required by the said writ to have the body of
the said A.B. before this Court (*or* before the judge aforesaid) on . .
. day of . . . 20\..., at . . .o\'clock and to make a return of the said
writ. In default thereof the said Court will then, or so soon thereafter
as counsel can be heard be moved to commit you to prison for your
contempt in not obeying the said writ.

Dated the . . . day of . . . 20\...

(Signed)

of

Solicitor for

To . . .

Form 122---Order for Writ of Habeas Corpus

Form 122.

O.17, r.2

ORDER FOR WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS

In the National Court of Justice

sitting at . . .

The Hon. Mr. Justice . . . (Judge in Chambers)

On hearing . . . and on reading the affidavit of . . . filed herein.

It is ordered that a writ of Habeas Corpus issue directed to . . . to
have the body of . . . before a Judge (in Chambers) at . . . immediately
after the receipt of such writ to undergo and receive all and singular
such matters, and things as our Court (*or* Judge) shall then and there
consider of concerning him in this behalf.

Dated the . . . Day of . . . 20\...

Form 123---Order of Committal

Form 123.

O.17, r.8

\(3\)

ORDER OF COMMITTAL

(*Heading as in action*)

On motion this day made unto this Court by counsel for the plaintiff and
on reading (an affidavit of . . . filed the . . . day of . . . 20\...,
of service on the defendant C.D. of a copy of the order of the Court
dated the . . . day of . . . 20\..., and of notice of this motion):

And it appearing to the satisfaction of the Court that the defendant
C.D. has been guilty of contempt of court in (*state the contempt*):

It is ordered that for his said contempt the defendant do stand
committed to . . . Corrective Institution to be there imprisoned (until
further order).

It is further ordered that this order shall not be executed if the
defendant C.D. complies with the following terms, namely, . . .

Dated the . . . day of . . . 20\...

Form 124---Human Rights Enforcement Application Form

Form 124

O23 r7(c)

PAPUA NEW GUINEA

\[IN THE NATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE\]

HUMAN RIGHTS ENFORCEMENT APPLICATION FORM

### 1\. Name of Applicant: . . .

### 2\. Address: . . .

### 3\. Phone numbers: . . .

### 4\. What happened? Tell your story why you say someone breached your
human rights. Refer to dates and places: . . .

. . .

. . .

### 5\. Rights or Freedoms to be enforced. Tick the box next to your right
or freedom that has been breached:

· right to freedom (s 32); \[ \]

· right to life (s 35); \[ \]

· protection from inhuman treatment (s 36); \[ \]

· protection of the law (s 37); \[ \]

· proscribed acts (s 41); \[ \]

· liberty of the person (s 42); \[ \]

· freedom from forced labour (s 43); \[ \]

· freedom from arbitrary search and entry (s 44); \[ \]

· freedom of conscience, thought and religion (s 45); \[ \]

· freedom of expression (s 46); \[ \]

· freedom of assembly and association (s 47); \[ \]

· freedom of employment (s 48); \[ \]

· right to privacy (s 49); \[ \]

· right to vote and stand for public office (s 50); \[ \]

· right to freedom of information (s 51); \[ \]

· right to freedom of movement (s 52); \[ \]

· protection from unjust deprivation of property (s 53); \[ \]

· equality of citizens (s 55). \[ \]

### 6\. Who breached your rights? Name or describe the person who will be a
defendant if this proceeding goes to Court:

### 7\. Do you want the defendant summoned to appear before the National
Court?

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
**8. DECLARATION**

I,

declare this statement to be true and correct to the best of my
knowledge and belief AND I hereby make application for the enforcement
of my rights or freedom as guaranteed by the Constitution and seek
orders under section 58 and any other orders the Court may see fit to
make.

Dated this . . . day of . . . 20 . . .

Signature of

Applicant

**The application may be made by filling in this form and giving it
to:**

F a Clerk of the District Court

F the Assistant Registrar in your town; or

F a Judge of the National Court in your Province; or

F The Registrar of the National Court, PO Box 7018, Boroko, NCD.

**Instructions to Court Clerks**

When this form is handed to you, please forward it as quickly as
possible to the Registrar of the National Court. Fax: 325 7732, PO Box
7018, Boroko, NCD.

Form 125---Complaint of Unlawful or Unreasonable Detention under Section
42(5) of the Constitution\*

Form 125

O23 r7(5)(a)

PAPUA NEW GUINEA

\[IN THE NATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE\]

COMPLAINT OF UNLAWFUL OR UNREASONABLE DETENTION\
UNDER SECTION 42(5) OF THE CONSTITUTION\*

### 1\. Name of Complainant:

### 2\. Address:

### 3\. Phone numbers:

### 4\. Where have you been detained? (Give name of Police Lock-up or
Correctional Institution.) For how long have you been detained? What
happened? Tell your story why you say you have been unlawfully or
unreasonably detained.

### 5\. DECLARATION

I, \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_,

declare this statement to be true and correct to the best of my
knowledge and belief AND I hereby make a complaint to the National Court
that I have been unlawfully or unreasonably detained.

Dated this . . . day of . . . 20

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
Signature of Complainant

The complaint may be made by filling in this form and giving it to:

F a Clerk of the District Court

F the Assistant Registrar in your town; or

F a Judge of the National Court in your Province; or

F the Registrar of the National Court, PO Box 7018, Boroko, NCD.

Instructions to Court Clerks

When this form is handed to you, please forward it as quickly as
possible to the Registrar of the National Court. Fax: 325 7732, PO Box
7018, Boroko, NCD.

\* Section 42(5) (*liberty of the person*) of the *Constitution* states:

Where complaint is made to the National Court or a Judge that a person
is unlawfully or unreasonably detained ---

\(a\) the National Court or a Judge shall inquire into the complaint
and order the person concerned to be brought before it or him; and

\(b\) unless the Court or Judge is satisfied that the detention is
lawful, and in the case of a person being detained on remand pending
his trial does not constitute an unreasonable detention having regard,
in particular, to its length, the Court or a Judge shall order his
release either unconditionally or subject to such conditions as the
Court or Judge thinks fit.

Form 126---Commencement of Proceedings and Summons

Form 126

O23 r8(1)(b)

PAPUA NEW GUINEA

\[IN THE NATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE\]

*HROI NO OF* \...\...

IN THE PROCEEDING OF ENFORCEMENT OF BASIC RIGHTS\
UNDER THE CONSTITUTION\
OF THE INDEPENDENT STATE OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA,\
SECTION 57\
RE \[here insert brief description of the proceeding\]\
COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS\
AND SUMMONS

**THE NATIONAL COURT**, \[here insert brief reasons for the Court acting
on its own initiative\], under Section 57(1) of the *Constitution*,
**COMMENCES THESE PROCEEDINGS** on its own initiative to enforce the
rights and freedoms of \[here insert the names or description of the
persons whose rights or freedoms may have been infringed\], those rights
being:

· \[here insert the right(s) or freedom(s) being enforced, eg freedom
from inhuman treatment and punishment under Section 36(1) of the
*Constitution*\]

**AND FOR THE PURPOSES OF THESE PROCEEDINGS THE FOLLOWING PERSONS ARE
UNDER SECTION 57(3) OF THE CONSTITUTION SUMMONED TO APPEAR BEFORE THE
NATIONAL COURT AT . . . ON . . . AT . . .** , so that the National Court
may inquire into this\
proceeding and determine whether it is necessary or appropriate to make
further orders or declarations for the purposes of enforcement of Basic
Rights under Section 57(3) of the *Constitution*:

· . . .

· . . .

**AND TAKE NOTICE** that failure to comply with this order may be deemed
to be contempt of court and expose the person who fails to comply to the
sanctions of the criminal law, including arrest, fine and/or
imprisonment.

**DATED THIS . . .DAY OF. . . ,**

**. . .**

**JUSTICE . . . .**

A JUDGE OF THE NATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE

Form 127---Statement of Alleged or Suspected Breach of Human Rights

Form 127

O23 r9(1)

PAPUA NEW GUINEA

\[IN THE NATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE\]

STATEMENT OF ALLEGED OR SUSPECTED\
BREACH OF HUMAN RIGHTS

### 1\. Name of person making statement:

### 2\. Address:

### 3\. Phone numbers:

### 4\. Your statement: Tell your story about what you saw or heard, and
what happened. Give names of the people involved or describe them.

### 5\. DECLARATION

I, . . . , declare this statement to be true and correct to the best of
my knowledge and belief AND I hereby bring the information to the
attention of the National Court.

Dated this . . . day of . . . 20

Signature

**Please give this form to:**

F a Clerk of the District Court

F the Assistant Registrar in your town; or

F a Judge of the National Court in your Province; or

F the Registrar of the National Court, PO Box 7018, Boroko, NCD.

**Instructions to Court Clerks**

When this form is handed to you, please forward it as quickly as
possible to the Registrar of the National Court. Fax: 325 7732, PO Box
7018, Boroko, NCD.

Form 128---Request for Proceeding to be Placed on Human Rights List

Form 128

O23 r10

PAPUA NEW GUINEA

\[IN THE NATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE\]

REQUEST FOR PROCEEDING TO BE PLACED ON HUMAN RIGHTS LIST

TO: THE REGISTRAR

I request that the attached proceeding, in which the following persons
are described as plaintiffs:

. . . ; and the following persons are described as defendants: . . . be
placed on the Human Rights List.

. . .

Signed \[Plaintiff/defendant or their lawyer to sign\]

Date . . .

Form 129---Listing Statement

Form 129

O23 r10(1)

PAPUA NEW GUINEA

\[IN THE NATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE\]\
LISTING STATEMENT

The \[Plaintiff/Defendant\] makes the following statement in support of
an application to have these proceedings \[placed on/removed from\] the
Human Rights List:

### 1\. The nature of the dispute\... \[set out in a summary form\];

. . .

### 2\. The issues which are likely to arise in the proceedings are\...
\[set out in a summary manner\];

. . .

### 3\. The proceedings ought to be \[placed on/removed from\] the Human
Rights List for the following reasons:

. . .

### 4\. The attitude of other parties to this application is:

. . .

Signed \[Plaintiff or plaintiff's lawyer shall sign\]

Date . . .

specified in the order under this Sub-rule.

SCHEDULE 2.

TABLE 1.\
SCALE OF COSTS

(U.K. 0.62 Appendix)

PART I.---PREPARATION OF DOCUMENTS

The following items shall not apply to any cause or matter to which Part
2

applies.

ITEM

1\. *Institution of proceedings*:

\(a\) Preparing, issuing, filing and service of writ of K15-\
K45 summons, including statement of claim endorsed\
on it, originating summons or third party notice

\(b\) Preparing, issuing, filing and service of any petition
K20---K45\
for the dissolution of a marriage

\(c\) Preparing, issuing, filing and service of any petition
K10---K40\
for the winding up of a company

\(d\) Preparing, issuing, filing and service of any K10---K40\
petition, chamber summons, originating motion\
case or special case stated, required under any Act,\
Rules or Regulations thereunder

\(e\) Preparing and issuing concurrent writ of summons K10\
or originating summons, renewing writ of summons\
or originating summons

No allowance for \"instructions\" is included in this item.\
Instructions are allowed under Item 12.

2\. *Interlocutory proceedings*: Preparing, issuing, filing and
K10---K45 service of any notice of motion, summons or application,
notice of interlocutory appeal or any writ of execution (including
renewing)

3\. *Other Documents*: Preparing (including where necessary filing,
serving or delivering) any document not otherwise provided for,
including-

\(a\) any documents to renew a writ of summons or originating summons,
to amend any document or to obtain an order for substituted service or
giving leave to serve out of the jurisdiction;

\(b\) any pleading, answer to petition, particulars of pleadings,
requests for such particulars, interrogatories, affidavits and lists
of documents, notice to produce, admit or inspect documents and
amendments to any documents;

\(c\) any affidavit or other document for use in connection with Item
1;

\(d\) any brief to counsel or case to counsel to advise in writing or
in conference;

\(e\) any instructions to counsel to settle any document except where
an allowance for the preparation of that document is recoverable under
Items 1, 2 or 3;

\(f\) any order;\
for first five A4 pages K6 per page

for each A4 page thereafter K2 per page (or\
proportionately)

*Note to Items 1, 2 and 3*

Items 1, 2 and 3 include engrossing and three copies. Any additional
copies required to be charged under Item 4. Items 3(d) and (e) each
include the copy for counsel.

\"Discretionary costs\" are defined in Order 22 Rule 36(3).

4\. *Copy documents:*

\(a\) Typed top copy---A4 K0.60 per page

\(b\) Photographic printed and carbon copies---A4 K0.50 per page

PART 2.---BLOCK ALLOWANCE FOR PREPARATION OF DOCUMENTS

### 5\. In any action for damages for personal injuries, and K60---K300\
in any other cause or matter as the party entitled to\
receive the costs may elect, a block allowance shall\
be made in place of the Items prescribed in Part 1,\
Unless, in any such case, the taxing officer otherwise\
directs; and the allowance shall be

PART 3.---COUNSEL\'S FEES

6\. (1) Appearing and arguing a case\
*First day*

**K10,001.00 - Excess of**\
**K50,000.00 K50,000.00**

\(a\) Contested hearing for final relief of 275.00 350.00\
order

\(b\) Uncontested proceedings for 100.00 130.00\
final relief or order

\(c\) Assessment where liability is 225.00 300.00\
admitted

\(d\) Appeal from District or K100.00---K275.00\
Local Court

\(e\) Interlocutory application--- K100.00---K275.00\
contested

\(f\) Interlocutory application---*ex parte* K50.00\
or by consent

\(g\) Application for contested K30.00---K150.00\
adjournment

\(h\) Taking a deferred judgement K30.00

*Second and subsequent days*\
wo-thirds of first day

\(2\) Opinions and conferences

\(a\) Counsel settling statement of K50.00---K100.00\
claim on writ, defence or other\
documents

\(b\) Counsel\'s written advice on K50.00-\
K100.00 evidence

\(c\) Counsel\'s or solicitor\'s written K50.00---K200.00\
advice on settlement for a\
disabled person

\(d\) Conference by counsel with\
solicitor, party or witnesses---

*Note to Item 6(2)* first hour K40.00\
each subsequent hour K30.00

Counsel in these items refers to a lawyer practising solely as a
barrister.

PART 4.---COUNSEL\'S TRAVELLING EXPENSES

7\. (1) Where a lawyer is required to travel from the town where he
practises to appear as counsel in Court he shall be allowed return air
fares to attend the Court and reasonable hotel expenses.

\(2\) Where the fees, costs and expenses of an overseas counsel are
certified by the trial Judge under Order 22 Rule 26 there shall be
allowed return economy class air fares to the nearest town where
suitable counsel could be obtained, and reasonable hotel expenses.

\(3\) Allowance should not be made in Paragraph (1) or (2) for transport
within the town of trial.

PART 5.---ATTENDANCES

8\. *Interlocutory attendances*: attending on the K6.00---K50.00
examinations of witnesses ordered under Order 11 Rule 8

9\. *Counsel*: Attending counsel in conference---for K15.00\
each half hour or part of a half hour

(Note: Counsel here refers to a lawyer practising solely as a barrister.
See s33 Lawyers Act.)

10\. *Trial on hearing:* Attending the trial on hearing of a cause or
matter where the trial Judge has certified the fees, costs and expenses
of a second lawyer under Order 22 Rule 26---

Appearing:

\(a\) as junior counsel two thirds of the fee\
allowed to the counsel\
under Part 3

\(b\) as instructing solicitor to a lawyer K100.00 per day\
practising solely as a barrister

PART 6.---ALLOWANCES TO WITNESSES

11\. (1) (a) *Professional*

Not more than K30.00 per hour or part of an hour necessarily absent
from their professional rooms or place of business and not to exceed
K150.00 for any one day.

\(b\) *Others*

The amount of salary or wages actually lost but not to exceed K30.00
per\
hour.

\(2\) Where a witness does not reside in the town where he is required
to give evidence, he shall be allowed such additional sum as is
reasonable for travel expenses to and from that town and for
accommodation but not transport within that town.

\(3\) A witness attending in more than one cause will be entitled to a
proportionate part only in each cause.

PART 7.---PREPARATION FOR TRIAL

12\. *Work necessarily or properly done in preparing* Discretionary\
*for a trial or hearing* of any cause or matter,\
whatever the mode of trial or hearing, or for\
the hearing of any appeal, and not otherwise\
provided for

*Notes to Item* 12

### 1\. This Item is intended to cover the doing of any work not otherwise
provided for and which was necessarily or properly done in preparing for
a trial, hearing or appeal, or before a settlement of the matter in
dispute, including---

\(1\) *The Clients*: Taking instructions to sue, defend, counterclaim,
appeal or\
oppose, etc., attending on and corresponding with client;

\(2\) *Witnesses*: Interviewing and corresponding with witnesses and
potential\
witnesses, taking and preparing proofs of evidence and, where
appropriate, arranging attendance at Court, including issue of
subpoena;

\(3\) *Expert Evidence*: Obtaining and considering reports or advice
from experts and plans, photographs and models; where appropriate
arranging attendance at Court, including issue of subpoena;

\(4\) *Inspections*: Inspecting any property or place material to the
proceedings;

\(5\) *Searches and Inquiries*: Making searches in the Titles Office
and elsewhere for relevant documents; searches in the Companies
Registry and similar matters;

\(6\) *Special Damages*: Obtaining details of special damages and
making or obtaining any relevant calculations;

\(7\) *Other parties*: Attending on and corresponding with other
parties or their solicitors;

\(8\) *Discovery*: Perusing, considering or collating documents for
affidavit or list of documents; attending to inspect or produce for
inspection any documents required to be produced or inspected by order
of the Court or by virtue of Order 9;

\(9\) *Documents*: Consideration of pleadings, affidavits, cases and
instructions to and advice from counsel, any law involved and any
other relevant documents, including collating;

\(10\) *Negotiations*: Work done in connection with negotiations with
a view to settlement;

\(11\) *Agency*: Correspondence with and attendances on or other work
done by an agent in another town;

\(12\) *Interest*: Where relevant the calculation of interest on
damages;

\(13\) *Notices*: Preparation and service of miscellaneous notices,
including notices to witnesses to attend Court.

### 2\. The sums sought under each Sub-paragraph (1) to (13) should be shown
separately against each Item followed by the total of all items under
that paragraph.

### 3\. This item should begin with a short statement of ---

\(a\) the main issues; and

\(b\) any particular difficulties of fact or law; and

\(c\) any special skill, knowledge or responsibility required.

This should be followed not by a chronological narrative, but by an
analysis of the work done, separated under main headings appropriate to
the subject matter. Under a heading of, for example, \"Attendances on
and correspondence with client\", there should be included a statement
of the number of attendances on the client, the total time occupied and
the number of letters sent, but not the details of every attendance or
of every letter.

PART 8.---ADMIRALTY

13\. (a) Obtaining arrest or release of property K40.00

\(b\) Entry or withdrawal of any caveat K10.00

\(c\) Obtaining bail or guarantee or K25.00\
undertaking in lieu of bail

\(d\) Giving bail ---

\(i\) one surety K45.00

\(ii\) two sureties K50.00

*Note to Item 13(d)*

This Item includes drawing the bail bond, affidavits and other documents
required in connection with the giving of bail and any attendances
required to procure the signing of the bond, the swearing of any such
affidavit and the filing and service of any such document.

\(e\) Giving guarantee or undertaking in lieu of bail K25.00

*Note to Item 13(e)*

This Item includes preparing the guarantee or undertaking and any
attendances required to procure the signing and stamping of them.

\(f\) Issuing commission of appraisement or K25.00\
appraisement and sale

\(g\) Lodging a preliminary act Discretionary

*Note to Items 13(a) to 13(g)*

These Items include where applicable the preparation, filing, lodging,
service and perusal of documents; the swearing of any affidavit; the
obtaining or giving of consent and the provision of any undertaking in
writing to the Marshal.

\(h\) Attendance at the Registry or Marshal\'s Office K10.00\
not otherwise provided for

PART 9.---TAXATION OF COSTS

14\. (a) *Taxation*: Obtaining the reference, preparing bill
Discretionary of costs and copies and attending to lodge; attending
taxation; vouching and completing bill, paying taxing fee and lodging
for certificate or order

\(b\) *Review:* Preparing and filing notice of motion to Discretionary
review decision of taxation officer; preparing and delivering objections
or answers to objections, including copies for service and filing and
considering opponent\'s answers on objections as the case may be;
attending hearing of review

TABLE 2.\
FIXED COSTS

(U.K. 0.62 Appendix 3)

COSTS ON RECOVERY OF LIQUIDATED SUM WITHOUT TRIAL

\(1\) *Basic costs*:

The following scale of costs shall apply in relation to the following
cases if the writ of summons was issued on or after the commencement
date and was endorsed in accordance with Order 4 Rule 10 with a claim
for a debt or liquidated demand or specified damages only of K1,000.00
or upwards ---

\(a\) in cases in which the defendant pays the amount claimed or a sum
of not less than K1,000.00 within the time and in the manner required
by the endorsement of the writ:

**Amount recovered Amount recovered Amount recovered**\
**less than K5,000.00 between K5,000.00 more than K10,000.00**\
**and K10,000.00**\
K30.00 K50.00 K100.00

\(b\) in cases in which the plaintiff obtains judgement on failure to
give notice of intention to defend, or in default of defence or of
verification of defence:

**Amount recovered Amount recovered Amount recovered**\
**less than K5,000.00 between K5,000.00 more than K10,000.00**\
**and K10,000.00**\
K40.00 K70.00 K130.00

\(c\) in cases in which the plaintiff obtains judgement under Order 13
Rule 38 (Summary Judgement) for a sum of K1,000.00 or upwards, either
unconditionally or unless that sum is paid into Court or to the
plaintiff\'s solicitors:

**Amount recovered Amount recovered Amount recovered**\
**less than K5,000.00 between K5,000.00 more than K10,000.00**\
**and K10,000.00**\
K80.00 K100.00 K270.00

2\. *Additional costs*:

The following costs shall be in addition to those costs allowed in the
preceding paragraphs of the table:

\(1\) The fee paid on the issue of the writ \*note

\(2\) Where there is more than one defendant, in K10.00\
respect of each additional defendant served

\(3\) Where substituted service is ordered and K30.00\
effected, in respect of each defendant served

\(4\) Where service out of the jurisdiction is ordered K60.00\
and effected

\(5\) In the case of judgement in default of defence K20.00\
or judgement under Order 13 Rule 38 where\
notice of intention to defend is given after the time\
limited and the plaintiff makes an affidavit of service\
for the purpose of a judgement on failure to give\
notice of intention to defend (the allowance to\
nclude the search)

\(6\) In the case of judgement under Order 13 Rule K20.00\
38 where an affidavit of service of the summons\
is required

\(7\) In the case of judgement under Order 13 Rule K20.00\
38 for each adjournment of the summons

3\. *Judgement for costs*:

\(1\) Where a plaintiff or defendant signs judgement\
or costs under Order 22 Rule 17 there shall be\
allowed ---

Cost of the judgement K10.00

\(2\) Where a writ of execution (or writ of\
possession) is issued against a party\
there shall be allowed ---

Cost of issuing execution K50.00

TABLE 3.\
COURT FEES

### 1\. On filing an initiating process K50.00

Note 1. In this clause \"initiating process\" means ---

\(a\) an originating process under the Rules (other than a notice of
appeal to the Supreme Court and a summons for leave to appeal to the
Supreme Court); or

\(b\) a petition; or

\(c\) a summons commencing proceedings under the Companies Rules; or

\(d\) a writ of summons in Admiralty.

Note 2. This clause does not apply to a summons by which an application
for a grant or resealing under Order 19 is made in respect of an estate
the sworn gross value of which is less than K12,000.00.

### 2\. On filing a summons for leave to appeal to the K50.00\
Supreme Court

### 3\. On filing a notice of appeal to the Supreme Court K50.00\
except where, in respect of proceedings to which the\
notice relates, a summons for leave to appeal has\
been filed

### 4\. To open the registry ---

\(a\) on a Saturday, Sunday or other holiday K50.00

\(b\) on any other day before 7.45 a.m. or after 4.06 K50.00\
p.m.

### 5\. To furnish a copy of a document in any proceedings K10.00\
to a person who is not a party to the proceedings

### 6\. To furnish to a party to proceedings a second or K5.00\
subsequent copy of the written reasons for the decision\
of any Judge or of the Registrar in relation to the\
proceedings, for each copy

### 7\. To furnish a transcript of evidence in a civil case to K0.50\
any party to proceedings---per A4 page

### 8\. For an officer of the Court to produce a document K10.00\
at a place other than the National Court building at\
Waigani

Fees to be paid to the Marshal in Admiralty to be the same fees as are
from time to time taken by the Sheriff for the service and execution of
process of the Court.

TABLE 4.\
SHERIFF\'S FEES

A deposit on account of the fees applicable to any proceeding may be
required before such proceeding is commenced or at any time during its
course and a memorandum of the amount deposited shall be delivered to
the party making the deposit.

### 1\. Entering any writ of execution K15.00

### 2\. Service or attempted service of process for each\
address at which service is attempted K5.00

### 3\. Executing writ for levy of property K50.00

### 4\. Giving notice to occupants to vacate premises\
pursuant to writ of possession K5.00

### 5\. Executing writ of possession ---

\(a\) where premises are vacated on request only K15.00

\(b\) where occupants are removed from premises K50.00

### 6\. Executing fee for any warrant or commission\
not provided for elsewhere K20.00

### 7\. Keeper\'s fees, each person for each day of 8 hours\
or part of 8 hours K20.00

### 8\. On every search---each name K1.00

### 9\. Advertisement---drawing & inserting K10.00

### 10\. Settling and executing every deed of transfer or like K15.00\
document, including copies

### 11\. Certifying office copy of any writ K2.00

### 12\. Opening office ---

\(a\) on a Saturday, Sunday or other holiday K50.00

\(b\) on any other day before 7.45 a.m. or K50.00\
after 4.06p.m.

### 13\. The amount reasonably incurred for ---

\(a\) advertising; and

\(b\) keeping of livestock levied upon; and

\(c\) disbursements necessary to the execution, or\
attempted execution of any writ, or warrant,\
and not otherwise provided for.

TABLE 5.\
PROBATE

### 1\. In respect of proceedings commenced after the commencement date
costs of and incidental to the obtaining for the first time of probate
or administration or of resealing of probate or letters of
administration (including satisfying any requisition made by the
Commissioner of Probate Duties after the date of the grant, the perusal
and checking of the assessment of duty and the payment of duty under the
*Wills, Probate and Administration Act*, and all work and attendance
incidental to these matters including the uplifting of the grant) shall
be allowed in accordance with the scale below. Gross value of the estate
is as accepted by the Commissioner of Probate Duties.

**Disclosed value of assets Costs allowed**\
**K**

not exceeding K7,500.00 250.00

exceeding K7,500.00 but not exceeding K15,000.00 375.00

exceeding K15,000.00 but not exceeding K25,000.00 435.00

exceeding K25,000.00 but not exceeding K40,000.00 500.00

exceeding K40,000.00 but not exceeding K55,000.00 565.00

exceeding K55,000.00 but not exceeding K70,000.00 630.00

exceeding K70,000.00 but not exceeding K85,000.00 695.00

exceeding K85,000.00 but not exceeding K100,000.00 760.00

exceeding K100,000.00 but not exceeding 855.00 K125,000.00

exceeding K125,000.00 but not exceeding 950.00 K150,000.00

exceeding K150,000.00 but not exceeding 1,045.00 K175,000.00

exceeding K175,000.00 but not exceeding 1,140.00 K200,000.00

exceeding K200,000.00 but not exceeding 1,300.00 K250,000.00

exceeding K250,000.00 but not exceeding 1,460.00 K300,000.00

exceeding K300,000.00 but not exceeding 1,680.00 K400,000.00

exceeding K400,000.00 but not exceeding 1,900.00 K500,000.00

exceeding K500,000.00 2,100.00

### 2\. In respect of proceedings commenced after the commencement date,
costs of and incidental to the obtaining of any grant or resealing after
the first up to and including the uplifting of the probate or letters of
administration so granted or resealed shall be allowed in accordance
with the scale below.

Value of the assets remaining to be administered Costs Allowed\
at the time of application for the grant K

not exceeding K1,000.00 80.00

exceeding K1,000.00 but not exceeding K2,000.00 100.00

exceeding K2,000.00 but not exceeding K4,000.00 120.00

exceeding K4,000.00 but not exceeding K6,000.00 155.00

exceeding K6,000.00 but not exceeding K8,000.00 170.00

exceeding K8,000.00 but not exceeding K10,000.00 190.00

exceeding K10,000.00 but not exceeding K12,000.00 215.00

exceeding K12,000.00 but not exceeding K14,000.00 235.00

exceeding K14,000.00 but not exceeding K16,000.00 250.00

exceeding K16,000.00 but not exceeding K18,000.00 270.00

exceeding K18,000.00 but not exceeding K20,000.00 295.00

exceeding K20,000.00 K4.00 for each\
K2,000.00 in\
excess of\
K20,000.00 to\
a maximum of\
K1,255.00

[^1]: Papua New Guinea

    NATIONAL COURT RULES

    A consolidation of the Rules of the National Court\
    made between 1983 and 2011 current at 1st December 2012

    Publication date 1st December 2012

    Published under the authority of the\
    Chief Justice Sir Salamo Injia, Kt.

    Editorial Committee\
    Judges Publication Committee\
    Chairman: Justice N. Kirriwom\
    Members:\
    Justice C Davani\
    Justice D Cannings\
    Justice D Hartshorn

    Compiled and edited\
    by\
    Gregory Lay\
    (Retired Judge of the National Court and Supreme Court)

[^2]: **RULES OF COURT**

    **NATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE**

    **Consolidation 1983-2011**

    Prior to the Independence of Papua New Guinea on 16 September 1975
    the superior trial court of Papua New Guinea was the Supreme Court,
    which sat with three or more judges as the appellate court. The
    Rules of the Supreme Court were substantially based on the Supreme
    Court Rules of Queensland, Australia.

    At Independence the Constitution established the National Court
    (Section 163(1)) as the superior trial court and the Supreme Court
    (Section 160(1)) as the appellate court. There are now different
    sets of rules with respect to the practice and procedure of each
    court. The National Court continued to function under the
    pre-Independence Rules of the Supreme Court until the National Court
    Rules were made by the Judges in 1983, pursuant to Section 184 of
    the Constitution. Many of the 1983 rules were sourced from the
    Supreme Court of New South Wales, some from the United Kingdom and
    others from the Australian Capital Territory and the Victorian Rules
    of Court. At the inception of the National Court Rules 1983 and for
    many years after reference works on the United Kingdom and New South
    Wales rules were found helpful. However now there are many Papua New
    Guinea cases to cite in aid of interpretation, especially in the
    more common areas of practice.

    This consolidation of the rules of court for the National Court has
    been occasioned by the fact that the original 1983 rules are out of
    print and, there has never been a consolidation of the 1983 rules,
    with amendments and new rules made since then. No amendments are
    introduced by this volume, which is strictly a consolidation of
    existing Rules. It brings together:

    ·National Court Rules 1983
    
    · National Court Appeal Rules 2005
    
    · National Court Motions Rules 2005
    
    · National Court Judicial Review Rules 2005
    
    · National Court Commercial List Rules 2005
    
    · National Court Election Petition Rules 2002 (as amended 2007)
    
    · ADR \[Alternative Dispute Resolution\] Rules 2010
    
    · Human Rights Rules 2010
    
    · Rules of the National Court of Justice (Underlying Law
    Amendment) 2011

    Most rules made since 1983 have been amendments to the National
    Court Rules 1983. The exceptions are the Election Petition Rules and
    the ADR Rules which were made as separate Rules and therefore appear
    in this volume after the end of the National Court Rules 1983 -
    2011.

[^3]: Signed by the Judges on 27th September 2005

[^4]: The words 'subject to these Rules' inserted by Rules of the
    National Court of Justice (Underlying Law Amendment) 2011.

[^5]: **Inserted by the *National Court Listing Rules* 2005**

[^6]: Signed by the Judges on 27th September 2005

[^7]: **Inserted by the *National Court Commercial List Rules* 2005**

[^8]: The Commercial List commenced operation in 2007.

[^9]: See Order 10 Rule 9A/16

[^10]: The National Court Appeal Rules were signed by the Judges on 27th
    September 2005

[^11]: **In operation 1st July 2011**
