# ORDER 11.-EVIDENCE.

## Division 1.-Summonses to Give Evidence.

### 1\. Interpretation of Division 1. (37/1)

In this Division, unless the contrary intention appears -

**person named** means, in relation to a summons, the person to whom
the summons is addressed;

**summons for production** means an order in writing requiring the
person named to attend as directed by the order and produce a document
or thing for the purpose of evidence;

**summons to give evidence** means an order in writing requiring the
person to attend as directed by the order for the purpose of giving
evidence.

### 2\. Power to issue. (37/2)

The Court may, in any proceedings, issue a summons to give evidence or a
summons for production as a summons both to give evidence and for
production in Form 42, 43, 44, 45 or 46, or in such other form as the
Court may direct for the attendance on any trial or other occasion of
the person named before the Court, officer, examiner or other person
having authority to take evidence.

### 3\. Conduct money. (37/3)

A summons shall not require the person named to attend or produce any
document or thing on any day on which his attendance is required unless
a sum sufficient to meet the reasonable expenses of the person named of
complying with the summons in relation to that day is paid or tendered
to him at the time of service of the summons not later than a reasonable
time before that day.

### 4\. Production by non-party. (37/4)

\(1\) Where the person named in a summons for production of any document
or thing, being a summons requiring attendance before the Court or
officer of the Court, is not a party to the proceedings, the summons
shall, unless the Court otherwise orders, permit him to produce the
document or thing to the Registrar or his delegate at his office at the
place stated in the summons not later than the day before the first date
on which his attendance is required, instead of attending and producing
the document or thing as required by the summons.

\(2\) Where a document or thing is produced to a clerk under Sub-rule
(1) the clerk shall -

\(a\) give a receipt to the person producing the document or thing;
and

\(b\) produce the document or thing as the nature of the case requires
or as the Court may direct.

\(3\) This Rule does not apply to so much of a summons as requires the
person named to attend to give evidence in any proceedings.

### 5\. Issue. (37/6)

\(1\) On request by a party, the Registrar shall, unless the Court
otherwise orders, issue a summons to give evidence or a summons for
production or a summons both to give evidence and for production.

\(2\) A summons shall be issued under seal.

\(3\) Unless the summons is issued in the Registry, the issuing officer
shall subscribe on it the place of issue.

\(4\) Subject to Sub-rule (5), a party requesting the issuing of a
summons shall file with the issuing officer a copy of the proposed
summons and produce a form of the summons.

\(5\) Where a party requests the issue of several summonses to give
evidence in similar terms but addressed to different persons, he need
file only one copy, but that copy must contain the name of each person
to whom any of the summonses is addressed.

\(6\) Unless the summons is issued in the Registry, the issuing officer
shall note the date of issue on the copy filed with him and shall send
the copy to the Registrar.

\(7\) A copy of the summons filed under this Rule shall not be open to
inspection by any person except by leave of the Court.

### 6\. Service. (37/7)

\(1\) Service of a summons shall be effected in accordance with this
Rule and not otherwise.

\(2\) Service of a summons may be effected by handing it to the person
named.

\(3\) If, on tender of a summons to the person named, he refuses to
accept it, the summons may be served by putting it down in his presence
after he has been told of the nature of the summons.

\(4\) Where the person named in a summons is a party and has a solicitor
in the proceedings, the summons may, with the consent of the solicitor,
be served on the person named by leaving it at the solicitor's address
for service.

### 7\. Setting aside. (37/8)

\(1\) The Court may, on motion by the person named in a summons, set
aside the summons wholly or in part.

\(2\) Notice of a motion under Sub-rule (1) must be filed and served on
the party on whose request the summons was issued.

## Division 2.-Evidence by Deposition.

### 8\. Order for examination of witness. (27/1)

The Court may, for the purpose of proceedings in the Court, make orders
-

\(a\) in Form 47 for the examination of any person on oath before an
officer of the Court or before such other person as the Court may in
Form 48 appoint as examiner at any place whether in or out of Papua
New Guinea; or

\(b\) in Form 49 for the sending of a letter of request to the
judicial authorities of another country to take, or cause to be taken,
the evidence of any person.

### 9\. Letter of request. (27/2)

\(1\) On the making of an order under Rule 8(b) for the sending of a
letter of request, the party obtaining the order shall -

\(a\) lodge with the Registrar -

\(i\) a form of the appropriate letter of request; and

\(ii\) the interrogatories (if any) and cross-interrogatories\
(if any) to accompany the letter of request; and

\(iii\) where English is not an official language of the country\
to whose judicial authorities the letter of request is to be sent, a
translation of each of the documents mentioned in Sub-paragraphs (i)
and (ii) in an official language of that country appropriate to the
place where the evidence is to be taken; and

\(b\) file -

\(i\) a copy of each of the documents mentioned in Paragraph (a); and

\(ii\) an undertaking by the party obtaining the order or his
solicitor to be responsible for all expenses incurred by the Court or
by any person at the request of the Court in respect of the letter of
request and, on being given notice of the amount of any such expenses,
to pay the amount to the Registrar.

\(2\) A translation lodged under Sub-rule (1)(a)(iii) must be certified
by the person making it to be a correct translation and the certificate
must state his full name and address and his qualifications for making
the translation.

### 10\. Documents for examiner. (27/3)

\(1\) The party obtaining an order for examination before an examiner
under Rule 8(a) shall furnish the examiner with copies of such of the
documents in the proceedings as are necessary to inform the examiner of
the questions to which the examination is to relate.

\(2\) Where the documents in the proceedings are not sufficient to
inform the examiner of the questions to which the examination is to
relate the Court shall, in the order for examination or in a later
order, state the questions to which the examination is to relate.

### 11\. Appointment for examination. (27/4)

\(1\) The examiner shall appoint a place and time for the examination.

\(2\) The time appointed shall, having regard to the convenience of the
person to be examined, and to the circumstances, be as soon as
practicable after the making of the order.

\(3\) The examiner shall give notice of an appointment under this Rule
to the party obtaining the order and that party shall, not less than
three days before the time appointed, give notice of the appointment to
each other party.

### 12\. Conduct of examination. (27/5)

\(1\) The examiner shall permit each party, his counsel and solicitor to
attend the examination.

\(2\) Subject to this Division, the proceedings before the examiner
shall be in accordance with the procedure of the Court.

\(3\) The examiner may administer an oath or affirmation.

\(4\) A person examined before an examiner may, unless the Court
otherwise orders, be cross-examined and re-examined.

\(5\) The examination, cross-examination and re-examination of a person
before an examiner shall, unless the Court otherwise orders, be
conducted in like manner as at a trial.

\(6\) The examiner may put any question to a person examined before him
as to-

\(a\) the meaning of any answer made by that person; or

\(b\) any matter arising in the course of the examination.

\(7\) The examiner may adjourn the examination from time to time or from
place to place.

### 13\. Examination of additional persons. (27/6)

The examiner may, with the written consent of each party to the
proceedings, examine any person in addition to the person named or
provided for in the order for examination, and, if he does so, he shall
annex to the deposition of that person the consent of each of the
parties.

### 14\. Objection. (27/7)

Where objection is taken to a question put to a person being examined
before an examiner, or a person being so examined takes objection to
answering a question put to him or to produce any document or thing-

\(a\) the examiner shall state to the parties his opinion on, but
shall not decide, the validity of the ground for the objection; and

\(b\) the question, the ground for the objection, the opinion of the
examiner, and the answer (if any) must be set out in the deposition of
that person or in a statement attached to the deposition; and

\(c\) the Court may, on motion by any party, decide the validity of
the ground for the objection; and

\(d\) if the Court decides against the objector, the Court may order
him to pay the costs occasioned by the objection.

### 15\. Taking of deposition. (27/8)

\(1\) The deposition of a person examined before an examiner must be
taken down by the examiner or a shorthand writer or some other person in
the presence of the examiner.

\(2\) The deposition must contain as nearly as may be the statement of
the person examined.

\(3\) The examiner may direct that the words of any question and the
answer to the question be set out in the deposition.

\(4\) Subject to Sub-rules (2) and (3) and Rule 14(b) the deposition
need not set out every question and answer.

### 16\. Authentication and filing. (27/9)

\(1\) The deposition of a person examined (or the shorthand notes of his
examination) shall be read to him.

\(2\) The examiner shall, if any party so requests, ask the person
examined to sign his deposition.

\(3\) The examiner shall authenticate the deposition by his signature.

\(4\) The examiner shall make on, or attach to, the deposition a note
signed by him of the time occupied in the examination and the fees
received by him in respect of the examination.

\(5\) The examiner shall send the deposition to the Registrar and the
Registrar shall file it in the proceedings.

\(6\) The examiner shall, unless the Court otherwise orders, send the
exhibits to the Registrar and the Registrar shall deal with the exhibits
in such manner as the Court may direct.

### 17\. Special report. (27/10)

\(1\) The examiner may make to the Court a special report with regard to
an examination before him and with regard to the absence of any person
from, or the conduct of any person at, the examination.

\(2\) The Court may direct such proceedings to be taken, or make such
order, on the report as the Court thinks fit.

### 18\. Default of witness. (27/11)

\(1\) Where a person has been required by a summons to attend before an
examiner, and he refuses to be sworn or affirmed for the purposes of the
examination or to answer any lawful question, or to produce any document
or thing, the examiner shall, at the request of any party, give to that
party a certificate, signed by the examiner, of the refusal.

\(2\) The Court may, on the certificate being filed, and on motion by
any party-

\(a\) order that person to be sworn or affirmed, or to answer the
question or to produce the document or thing, as the case may be; and

\(b\) order that person to pay any costs occasioned by his refusal.

### 19\. Order for payment of expenses. (27/12)

Where a party has given an undertaking as mentioned in Rule 9(1)(b)(ii)
and does not, within seven days after service on him of notice of the
amount of the expenses concerned, pay the amount of the expenses to the
Registrar, the Court may, on application by the Registrar-

\(a\) order the party to pay the amount of the expenses to the
Registrar; and

\(b\) stay the proceedings until payment so far as concerns the whole
or any part of any claim for relief by that party.

### 20\. Perpetuation of testimony. (27/13)

\(1\) Witnesses shall not be examined to perpetuate testimony unless
proceedings have been commenced for the purpose.

\(2\) Any person who would, in the circumstances alleged by him to
exist, become entitled on the happening of any future event to any
property, the right or claim to which cannot be tried before the
happening of the future event, may commence proceedings to perpetuate
any testimony which may be material for establishing the right or claim.

\(3\) Proceedings to perpetuate the testimony of witnesses shall not be
set down for trial.

\(4\) Where proceedings to perpetuate testimony touch any matter or
thing in which the State may have an interest, the Attorney-General may
be made a defendant.

\(5\) Where, pursuant to Sub-rule (4) the Attorney-General is made a
defendant to proceedings to perpetuate testimony, a deposition taken in
those proceedings shall not be inadmissible in other proceedings by
reason that the State was not a party to the proceedings to perpetuate
testimony.

\(6\) Sub-rule (2) does not affect the right of any person to commence
proceedings to perpetuate testimony in cases to which that Sub-rule does
not apply.

## Division 3.-Affidavits.

### 21\. Time for swearing. (38/1)

An affidavit for use in any proceedings may be sworn before or after the
commencement of the proceedings.

### 22\. Affidavit. (38/2)

\(1\) An affidavit shall be made in the first person.

\(2\) The body of an affidavit shall be divided into paragraphs numbered
consecutively, each paragraph being as far as possible confined to a
distinct portion of the subject.

\(3\) Where it appears to the person before whom an affidavit is sworn
that the deponent is illiterate or blind, he must certify in or below
the jurat that -

\(a\) the affidavit was read in his presence to the deponent; and

\(b\) the deponent seemed to understand the affidavit.

\(4\) Where an affidavit is made by an illiterate or blind deponent and
a certificate in accordance with Sub-rule (3) does not appear on the
affidavit, the affidavit may not be used unless the Court is satisfied
that the affidavit was read to the deponent and that he seemed to
understand it.

\(5\) Each page of an affidavit shall be signed by the deponent and by
the person before whom it is sworn.

\(6\) An affidavit shall be in Form 50.

### 23\. Alterations. (38/3)

\(1\) Where there is any interlineation, erasure or other alteration in
the jurat or body of an affidavit-

\(a\) the affidavit may nevertheless be filed, unless the Court
otherwise orders; but

\(b\) the affidavit may not be used without the leave of the Court
unless the person before whom the affidavit is sworn initials the
alteration and, in the case of an erasure, re-writes in the margin of
the affidavit any words or figures written on the erasure and signs or
initials them.

\(2\) Sub-rule (1) applies to an account verified by affidavit as if the
account were part of the affidavit.

### 24\. Annexures and exhibits. (38/4)

\(1\) A document to be used in conjunction with an affidavit shall,
where convenient, be annexed to the affidavit.

\(2\) Where annexure is inconvenient, the document may be made an
exhibit to the affidavit.

\(3\) An exhibit to an affidavit must be identified by a certificate
entitled in the same manner as the affidavit and made by the person
before whom the affidavit is sworn.

### 25\. Irregularity. (38/5)

\(1\) An affidavit may, unless the Court otherwise orders, be filed
notwithstanding any irregularity in form.

\(2\) An affidavit may, with the leave of the Court, be used
notwithstanding any irregularity in form.

### 26\. Filing. (38/6)

An affidavit may not be used without leave of the Court unless it has
been filed.

### 27\. Service. (38/7)

\(1\) A party intending to use an affidavit shall serve it on each other
interested party a reasonable time before the occasion for using it
arises.

\(2\) The Court may give directions concerning the service of
affidavits.

### 28\. Scandal, etc. (38/8)

Where there is scandalous, irrelevant or otherwise oppressive matter in
an affidavit, the Court may order that -

\(a\) the matter be struck out; or

\(b\) the affidavit be taken off the file.

