# ORDER 2.-ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS.

## Division 1.-Sittings and Vacations.

### 1\. Sittings of Court.

The sittings of the Court shall be held at such time or times as may be
determined by the Court.

### 2\. Postponement of sittings in Judge's absence.

\(1\) If, at the time of any sitting of the Court, a Judge is not
present at the place of sitting, a Judge may direct that the hearing be
postponed to another time or another place.

\(2\) Any direction given under Sub-rule (1) may be communicated to the
parties or their representatives by telephone or telegram.

### 3\. Vacation.

\(1\) There shall be a vacation in each year from 20 December to the
following 31 January, both inclusive.

\(2\) Any Judge may sit in vacation for another and may in vacation
exercise any authority which any other Judge might exercise if he were
present and sitting in Court.

\(3\) The time of the vacation shall not be reckoned in the times
appointed or allowed by these Rules for filing, delivering or amending
any pleading unless so directed by a Judge nor shall a pleading be
delivered or amended, nor judgement be entered in default, unless under
the direction of a Judge.

## Division 2.-The Registry.

### 4\. Custody of seal and stamp.

The seal and stamp of the Court shall be in the custody of the Registrar
and shall, when not in use, be kept under lock and key.

### 5\. Affixing of seal and stamp.

The seal or the stamp shall be affixed by the Registrar to such
documents as are by these Rules authorized to be sealed or stamped.

### 6\. Custody of records.

The Registrar shall have the custody of all records of the Court and of
all documents filed in the Registry or ordered to be deposited in the
Registry for safe custody or to be impounded.

### 7\. Supervision of officers.

The Registrar shall have the general supervision of the officers
employed in the Registry.

### 8\. Duties of Registrar.

All acts and things which by these Rules are required to be performed
and done in the Registry shall be done by the Registrar or officers
employed in the Registry.

### 9\. Judge may direct Registrar. (61/2)

A Judge may direct the Registrar to do, in any proceedings, any Act
relating to the duties of his office.

### 10\. Signing and filing of documents.

Documents may be signed for the Registrar and documents may be received
or filed by any clerk in the Registry to whom such duties are assigned.

### 11\. Registry hours. (2/6)

\(1\) The Registry shall be open to the public for business every day of
the year except Saturdays, Sundays and Court holidays.

\(2\) The Registry shall be open from 8.00 a.m. to 12.00 noon and 1.00
p.m. to 3.30 p.m.

### 12\. Opening of Registry outside business hours. (2/6)

Where any party or practitioner or any person having any interest in any
proceedings pending or about to be commenced has any proper business to
transact with the Registrar at any time when his office is not open to
the public which business for any reason could not be transacted when
the office is next to be opened in the normal course or which might if
so transacted involve the person concerned or any other person in
serious risk of prejudice that person may, on payment of a fee of K5.00,
require the Registrar to open his office to transact the business in
question at some proper and convenient time.

### 13\. Judge may direct Registrar to open Registry.

A Judge may, on sufficient cause being shown to him, direct the
Registrar to open his office for the transaction of business at any
specified time and for any specified period when it would not otherwise
be open for business and may if he sees fit fix a special fee to be paid
by any person to be specified in the order.

### 14\. Court holidays.

For the purpose of this Rule, Court holidays include -

\(a\) any day observed as a public holiday as defined in Section 3 of
the *Interpretation Act* 1975; and

\(b\) any day specified by these Rules or by resolution of the Judge
to be a Court holiday; and

\(c\) any part of a day during vacation when the Registry is closed.

### 15\. Register of documents filed.

There shall be kept in the Registry a register of all documents filed
and all proceedings taken in any cause or matter showing the dates on
which such documents are filed or such proceedings taken.

### 16\. Searches.

A person may search the records of the Court and obtain from the
Registrar a certified copy of record of the Court on satisfying the
Registrar that he has good and sufficient reason for so doing, and on
payment of the prescribed fee.

### 17\. Records, etc., not to be removed.

An original record of the Court or document or thing produced under
summons shall not be taken from the Registry without the order of a
Judge

### 18\. Review of Act or decision by Registrar.

Any Act or decision of the Registrar may be reviewed by a Judge who may
make an order by way of confirmation, variation or otherwise as he
thinks fit.

### 19\. Date of filing.

The date of filing shall be written by the Registrar on every document
which is filed.

### 20\. Serial number.

\(1\) The first document filed in any proceedings shall have a serial
number assigned to it in the Registry and that and each other document
in the proceedings shall bear that number together with a reference to
the calendar year in which the first document is filed.

\(2\) A new series of numbers shall be commenced at the beginning of
each calendar year.

### 21\. Distinguishing marks on documents.

Every judgement, order, certificate, petition, affidavit, or document
made, presented, filed or used in any cause or matter shall be
distinguished by having plainly written or stamped on its first page the
year and the number by which the cause or matter is distinguished in the
Cause Book.

## Division 3.-Documents.

### 22\. Heading.(65/1)

A document in any proceedings shall be headed **In the National Court of
Justice** and shall show the year and serial number of the proceedings.

### 23\. Title.

A document in any proceedings between parties shall be entitled between
the parties, and not otherwise.

### 24\. Title where there is no defendant.

Subject to any rule to the contrary, a document in any proceedings in
which there is no defendant shall be entitled **The Application of**
together with the name of the plaintiff, and not otherwise.

### 25\. Abbreviation of title.

Except in the case of an originating process, a document to be served on
a person not a party to the proceedings or a minute of a final judgement
or final order, may bear an abbreviation of the title of the proceedings
sufficient to identify the proceedings.

### 26\. Paper and writing. (65/2)

\(1\) This Rule applies to a document prepared by a party for use in the
Court, except to the extent that the nature of the document renders
compliance impracticable.

\(2\) A document shall be on paper of good and durable quality, capable
of receiving ink writing, and of the size known as international paper
size A4, that is to say, measuring approximately 297 mm long by 210 mm
wide.

\(3\) The writing on a document shall be on one face of the paper only
and a margin of not less than 51 mm shall be kept clear on the left-hand
side.

\(4\) There shall be a space of not less than 3mm between the lines of
writing.

\(5\) The writing shall be clear, sharp, legible and permanent.

\(6\) A carbon copy shall not be filed.

\(7\) A document shall not be filed if it bears any blotting, erasure,
or such alteration as to cause material disfigurement.

\(8\) The document shall be folded lengthwise.

### 27\. Backsheet. (65/3)

\(1\) A document prepared by a party for use in the Court shall have a
backsheet -

\(a\) headed **In the National Court of Justice**, and

\(b\) showing -

\(i\) the year and serial number of the proceedings; and

\(ii\) the title of the proceedings or an abbreviation of a title\
of the proceedings sufficient to identify the proceedings; and

\(iii\) a description of the document; and

\(iv\) the name, address and telephone number of the solicitor for the
party and, if the solicitor acts in the proceedings by an agent, the
name, address and telephone number of the agent.

\(2\) Where a party preparing a document for use in the Court is not
represented by a solicitor, Sub-rule (1)(b)(iv) does not apply, but the
backsheet shall show the name and address for service of the party and
the telephone number of the party.

\(3\) The backsheet of an affidavit shall be endorsed with the name of
the deponent and the date of swearing.

### 28\. Numbers. (65/4)

Dates, sums and other numbers shall be expressed in figures and not in
words.

### 29\. Scandal, etc. (65/5)

The Court may order to be struck out of any document any matter which is
scandalous, frivolous, vexatious, irrelevant or otherwise oppressive.

### 30\. Signing of documents. (65/8)

A copy of or a pleading, summons, notice of intention to defend, notice
of motion, notice of appeal, statement, request, requisition,
undertaking, list, account, note or other notice to be filed or served
by a party or other person in any proceedings shall be signed by his
solicitor or by him, if he has no solicitor.

## Division 4.-Sheriff.

### 31\. Default. (62/4)

\(1\) Where the Sheriff defaults by not executing any process according
to its tenor, he shall be liable to punishment as if in contempt of
Court.

\(2\) Order 14 Division 6 (contempt) applies to the punishment of the
Sheriff under this Rule as if his default were contempt of Court.

### 32\. Security for costs.

In every action against the Sheriff for anything done or omitted to be
done by him in the intended execution of his duty, the plaintiff shall
be compelled to give security for costs.

## Division 5.-Solicitors.

### 33\. Power to act by solicitors. (66/1)

\(1\) Every matter or thing which under an Act or these Rules is
required or allowed to be done by a party may be done by his solicitor.

\(2\) Sub-rule (1) does not apply where the context or subject matter
otherwise indicates or requires.

### 34\. Adverse parties. (66/2)

Where a solicitor or his partner acts as solicitor for any party to any
proceedings, or is a party to any proceedings, that solicitor shall not,
without leave of the Court, act for any other party to the proceedings
not in the same interest.

### 35\. Change of solicitor. (66/3)

\(1\) Where a solicitor acts for a party in any proceedings, the party
may change his solicitor.

\(2\) Where a party changes his solicitor, he shall file notice of the
change and serve the notice on the other parties and, where practicable,
his former solicitor.

### 36\. Change of agent. (66/4)

Where a solicitor (in this Rule called the principal solicitor) acts for
a party in any proceedings and another solicitor acts as agent for the
principal solicitor in the proceedings and the principal solicitor
changes the solicitor acting as agent, the party shall file notice of
the change and serve the notice on the other parties and on the former
agent solicitor.

### 37\. Appointment of solicitor. (66/5)

Where a party acts for himself in any proceedings and afterwards
appoints a solicitor to act for him in the proceedings, the party shall
file notice of the change and serve the notice on the other parties.

### 38\. Removal of solicitor. (66/6)

\(1\) Where a solicitor acts for a party in any proceedings and
afterwards the party determines the authority of the solicitor to act
for him in the proceedings -

\(a\) the party shall file notice of the change and serve the notice
on the other parties and on his former solicitor; and

\(b\) the former solicitor may file notice of the change and serve the
notice on the parties.

\(2\) Sub-rule (1) does not apply to a case to which Rule 35 applies.

### 39\. Withdrawal of solicitor. (66/7)

\(1\) Where a solicitor acts for a party to any proceedings and
afterwards ceases to act, the solicitor may, subject to Sub-rule (2),
file notice of the change and serve the notice on the parties.

\(2\) A solicitor shall not file or serve notice of a change under
Sub-rule (1) without leave of the Court unless he has, not less than
seven days before doing so, served on his former client notice of his
intention to file and serve the notice of change.

\(3\) A solicitor filing a notice of change under Sub-rule (1) shall,
except where the notice is filed with the leave of the Court, file and
serve with the notice an affidavit showing service in compliance with
Sub-rule (2).

\(4\) A solicitor may serve a notice under this Rule on his former
client by posting it to the former client at the residential or business
address of the former client last known to the solicitor.

### 40\. Effects of change. (66/8)

A change of which notice is required or permitted to be filed under any
of Rules 35, 36, 37, 38 and 39 shall not have effect as between a party
or solicitor to which the change relates on the one hand and the Court
or any other party on the other hand until notice of the change is filed
and, as regards any other party, served on that other party.

## Division 6.-Fees.

### 41\. Fees.

\(1\) The fees prescribed by Schedule 2 shall, in respect of the matters
to which they relate, be taken -

\(a\) in the Court, or

\(b\) by the several officers of the Court, or

\(c\) by a Commissioner or other person appointed to take evidence, as
the case may be.

\(2\) Subject to the succeeding Rules of this Order, a document shall
not be filed, issued, sealed or otherwise dealt with unless all fees
chargeable on or in respect of that document, or in respect of filing,
issuing, sealing, or dealing with that document, have been paid.

\(3\) The Registrar shall, immediately on payment of any fee on or in
respect of any document, or in respect of the filing, issuing, sealing,
or dealing with any document, mark in the margin of the document the
amount of the fee paid and the date of payment, and the person paying
that fee shall see that the marking is duly made.

### 42\. Reduction, waiver or deferral of fees.

Where it appears to the Registrar that the payment of any fee referred
to in Rule 41 would, owing to the circumstances of the particular case,
involve undue hardship, the Registrar may reduce, waive or defer the fee
in that particular case.

### 43\. Conventions.

Where by any convention it is provided that no fee shall be required to
be paid in respect of any proceedings, the fees referred to in Rule 41
shall not be taken in respect of those proceedings.

## Division 7.-Funds in Court.

### 44\. Deposit. (50/1,2)

\(1\) Subject to Rule 47, where money is paid into Court, the Registrar
shall, within two days after the date of payment into Court, deposit the
money to the credit of an account appointed by the Minister for Justice.

\(2\) Money deposited under Sub-rule (1) shall not be withdrawn or paid
from the account except by the authority of these Rules or of a
judgement or order.

### 45\. Withdrawal. (50/3)

\(1\) Money deposited under Rule 44 shall not be withdrawn or paid from
the bank except by authority of a direction in accordance with Sub-rule
(2).

\(2\) A direction under Sub-rule (1) -

\(a\) may be in the form of a cheque; and

\(b\) shall be for payment to a specified person; and

\(c\) shall bear the title (or a shortened title) and serial number of
the proceedings in which the order is made; and

\(d\) shall be signed by the Registrar and by such officer as the
Minister for Justice may appoint for that purpose.

\(3\) Notwithstanding Sub-rules (1) and (2), a bank shall not be bound
to inquire whether the requirements of Rule 44 or of Sub-rule (2)(c) and
(d) have been satisfied.

### 46\. Account. (50/4)

Where money is deposited in a bank under Rule 44 in any proceedings, the
Registrar shall keep an account in the proceedings of the deposit and of
all withdrawals (including withdrawals of interest) from the bank in the
proceedings.

### 47\. Investment. (50/5)

The Court may direct that funds paid into Court be invested in such
funds or securities as are from time to time authorized by a law of
Papua New Guinea as funds or securities in which a trustee may invest
trust funds.

### 48\. Interest. (50/6)

\(1\) Where money is paid into Court as security for costs or as
security on an appeal, or is paid into Court pursuant to Order 8
Division 6 interest on the money shall not be paid to any party.

\(2\) Where money is paid into Court pursuant to an order to abide the
decision in the proceedings, interest on the money shall not be paid to
any party unless the Court otherwise orders.

\(3\) Where the Registrar collects interest on funds invested under Rule
47, the Court may direct to whom the interest shall be paid.

### 49\. Authority of recipient. (50/7)

Subject to these Rules, funds in Court shall not be paid out of Court
except to the party entitled or, on his written authority or by order of
the Court, to his solicitor.

### 50\. Discharge of Registrar. (50/8)

\(1\) Any direction, cheque or other document for the payment of money
out of Court shall, when signed by the payee, be a discharge to the
Registrar for the money.

\(2\) Sub-rule (1) does not prevent the Registrar from requiring a
receipt for any payment by him.

### 51\. Death of payee. (50/9)

\(1\) Where, by any judgement or order, the Court directs the payment to
any person of any funds in Court, and it appears to the Registrar that
that person has died after the date on which the judgement or order took
effect and that probate of his will or letters of administration of his
estate have been granted to an executor or administrator, then, unless
the judgement or order otherwise directs, the Registrar may pay the
funds in Court to the executor or administrator.

\(2\) Where the person to whom the funds in Court are payable is
entitled under a direction for payment to creditors, shareholders or
debenture holders as such, the Registrar may pay under Sub-rule (1)
notwithstanding that it appears to him that that person died on or
before the date on which the judgement or order took effect.

\(3\) Subject to Sub-rule (4), this Rule does not authorize payment
where the person to whom payment is directed appears to the Registrar to
have been entitled as trustee, executor, administrator or otherwise not
in his own right and for his own use.

\(4\) The Registrar may, under this Rule, pay funds in Court to an
executor of the will of the person to whom payment is directed if it
appears to the Registrar that that person was entitled as sole or sole
surviving executor.

### 52\. Payment to partners. (50/10)

Where by any judgement or order, the Court directs the payment of money
in Court to any persons described in the order as partners, or as
trading or carrying on business in the name of a company or firm, the
Registrar may, unless the judgement or order otherwise directs, pay the
money to any one or more of those persons or to the survivor of them.

### 53\. Payment to executors or administrators. (50/11)

Where, by any judgement or order, the Court directs the payment of funds
in Court to persons described in the judgement or order as executors or
administrators, the Registrar may, unless the judgement or order
otherwise directs-

\(a\) if it appears to him that any of them died after that date on
which the judgement or order took effect-pay the funds in Court to
the survivor of them, and

\(b\) if it appears to him that any of them died on or before the date
on which the judgement or order took effect, but they are described in
the judgement, order or certificate as executors of the will or
administrators of the estate of a creditor, shareholder or debenture
holder-pay the funds in Court to the survivor of them, and

\(c\) if the funds in Court are money not exceeding K300.00-pay the
money to any of them.

### 54\. Payment by post. (50/12)

\(1\) Where any person is entitled to payment of any money in Court, he
may give to the Registrar a request to send to him by post at a
specified address a cheque for the money in a specified form.

\(2\) Where the Registrar sends a cheque in accordance with a request
under Sub-rule (1), payment of the cheque shall be a discharge to the
Registrar.

## Division 8.-Court Dress

### 55\. Court dress

Counsel shall appear in court wearing a long-sleeved clean ironed
 opaque white shirt or blouse with collar (a collarless blouse or 
 shirt is not acceptable) closed at the throat
and dark blue or black trousers or skirt and black business shoes
 or dark blue or black
sulu and black sandals with counsel’s gown and white bib 
(tabs). A wig is optional.

### 56\. Interpretation

In Rule 55 “Counsel’s gown” means a black gown reaching to the 
knees with the
material gathered/pleated across the shoulder blades, open at
 the front and generously
loose long sleeves with the sleeve material gathered at the 
inner bend of the forearm,
generally in a design worn in similar jurisdictions or approved 
by the Council of the
Law Society.

## Division 9.-Practice Directions

### 57\. Practice directions

The Registrar may, in consultation with the Chief Justice, 
issue a practice direction in
relation to any matter concerning these Rules to clarify 
the procedure and application
or to otherwise explain or regulate any matter concerning 
the Rules.
