# ORDER 22.-COSTS.

## Division 1.-Preliminary.

### 1\. Interpretation of Order 22. (52/1, 2)

\(1\) In this Order, unless the contrary intention appears -

**bill** means bill of costs;

**certificate** includes allocatur;

**contentious business** includes all actions, suits and proceedings;

**copy** includes manuscript copy, copy by a carbon impression,
machine-made engrossment, and other facsimile;

**taxed costs** means costs taxed in accordance with this Order;

**trustee** includes an executor of a will and an administrator of the
estate of a deceased person.

\(2\) In this Order -

\(a\) a reference to a fund, being a fund out of which costs are to be
paid, or being a fund held by a trustee, extends to any property held
for the benefit of any person or class of persons, or held on trust
for any purpose; and

\(b\) a reference to a fund held by a trustee extends to any property
to which he is entitled as trustee, whether alone or together with any
other person and whether the property is for the time being in the
possession of the trustee or not.

### 2\. Transitional.

This Order shall not affect the rights of a solicitor or client in
respect of matters pending on the commencement date.

### 3\. Application. (52/3)

This Order applies, subject to its terms, to and in respect of costs
payable or to be taxed under any order of the Court or under these Rules
and costs to be taxed in the Court under any Act.

### 4\. Powers of the Court generally. (52/4)

\(1\) The powers and discretions of the Court in relation to costs shall
be exercised subject to and in accordance with this Order.

\(2\) Subject to Sub-rule (1), this Order has effect subject to these
Rules and subject to any Act.

### 5\. Time for dealing with costs. (52/5)

\(1\) The Court may, in any proceedings, exercise its powers and
discretions as to costs at any stage of the proceedings or after the
conclusion of the proceedings.

\(2\) Where the Court makes an order in any proceedings for the payment
of costs, the Court may require that the costs be paid immediately,
notwithstanding that proceedings are not concluded.

## Division 2.-General.

Subdivision A.-General.

### 6\. Taxed costs and other provisions. (52/6)

\(1\) Subject to this Order, where, by or under these Rules or any order
of the Court, costs are to be paid to any person, that person shall be
entitled to his taxed costs.

\(2\) Where the Court orders that costs be paid to any person, the Court
may further order that, as to the whole or any part (specified in the
order) of the costs, instead of taxed costs, that person shall be
entitled to -

\(a\) a proportion specified in the order of the taxed costs; or

\(b\) the taxed costs from or up to a stage of the proceedings
specified in the order; or

\(c\) a gross sum specified in the order instead of the taxed costs;
or

\(d\) a sum in respect of costs to be ascertained in such manner as
the Court may direct.

### 7\. Costs in other courts. (52/7)

Where, in proceedings transferred to or removed into the Court, or in
proceedings on an appeal to the Court, the Court makes an order as to
the costs of proceedings before another court, the Court may -

\(a\) specify the amount of the costs to be allowed; or

\(b\) order that the costs be taxed in accordance with this Order; or

\(c\) make orders for the ascertainment of the costs by taxation or
otherwise in that other court.

### 8\. Order for payment. (52/8)

Subject to this Order, a party to proceedings in the Court shall not be
entitled to recover any costs of or incidental to the proceedings from
any other party to the proceedings except under an order of the Court.

### 9\. Order for taxation: When not required. (52/9)

\(1\) Where -

\(a\) an order of the Court directs the payment of costs; or

\(b\) proceedings are dismissed with costs; or

\(c\) a motion is refused with costs; or

\(d\) a party may tax costs under Rule 17 on the discontinuance of
proceedings; or

\(e\) a party may tax costs under Rule 18(1) or (2) on the acceptance
of money paid into Court,

the costs may be taxed without any order directing taxation.

\(2\) Where -

\(a\) proceedings are dismissed with costs; or

\(b\) a motion is refused with costs,

and the costs are not paid within four days after the signing of a
certificate of taxation of the costs, a party to whom the costs are
payable may enter judgement for the taxed costs.

### 10\. Default judgement. (52/10)

\(1\) Where judgement is entered for costs under Division 3 Order 12
(default judgement) the costs shall not be taxed but shall be in
accordance with Table 2 of Schedule 2.

\(2\) Sub-rule (1) does not apply to a judgement directed to be entered
under Order 12 Rule 32.

Subdivision B.-Entitlement.

### 11\. Following the event. (52/11)

If the Court makes any order as to costs, the Court shall, subject to
this Order, order that the costs follow the event, except where it
appears to the court that some other order should be made to the whole
or any part of the costs.

### 12\. Amendment of pleading without leave. (52/12)

Where a party amends a pleading without leave, he shall, unless the
Court otherwise orders, pay the costs of and occasioned by the
amendment.

### 13\. Interlocutory application. (52/12A)

Subject to this Order, the costs of any application or other step in any
proceedings shall, unless the Court otherwise orders, be paid and
otherwise dealt with in accordance with the provisions of this Order or
the provisions of any order relating to the general costs of the
proceedings.

### 14\. Extension of time. (52/13)

Where a party applies for an extension of time, he shall, unless the
Court otherwise orders, pay the costs of and occasioned by the
application, or an order made on or in consequence of the application.

### 15\. Non-admission of fact. (52/14)

Where a party to any proceedings serves a notice disputing a fact under
Order 9 Rule 29(2) (notices to admit facts), and afterwards that fact is
proved in the proceedings, he shall, unless the Court otherwise orders,
pay the costs of proof.

### 16\. Non-admission of document. (52/15)

Where a party to any proceedings serves a notice disputing the
authenticity of a document under Order 9 Rule 31(2) (admission of
documents discovered), and afterwards the authenticity of the document
is proved in the proceedings, he shall, unless the Court otherwise
orders, pay the costs of proof.

### 17\. Discontinuance. (52/16)

\(1\) Where, under Order 8 Rule 61, a party to any proceedings
discontinues the proceedings without leave as to the whole or any part
of the relief claimed by him against any other party, the discontinuing
party shall, unless the Court otherwise orders, pay the costs of the
party against whom the discontinued claim is made, occasioned by the
discontinued claim and incurred before service of notice of the
discontinuance.

\(2\) A party whose costs are payable under Sub-rule (1) may tax the
costs and, if the taxed costs are not paid within four days after the
signing of a certificate of the taxation, may enter judgement for the
taxed costs.

### 18\. Payment into Court. (52/17)

\(1\) Where, under Order 8 Division 6, a plaintiff before the trial or
hearing begins -

\(a\) accepts money brought into Court by a defendant in answer to a
cause of action; and

\(b\) abandons that cause of action as against all other defendants
(if any) sued on that cause of action jointly with the defendant
bringing the money into Court; and

\(c\) abandons all his other causes of action (if any),

then, after payment out, he may, unless the Court otherwise orders, tax
his costs of the proceedings in respect of his claims for relief against
the defendant bringing the money into Court, incurred before service of
notice of the deposit of the money accepted and, if the costs are not
paid within four days after the signing of a certificate of the taxation
enter judgement against that defendant for the taxed costs.

\(2\) Where a cross-claimant brings money into Court and, in his notice
of deposit, states pursuant to Order 8 Rule 73 that he takes into
account his cause of action on the cross-claim with a view to its
abandonment in case the money is accepted, and the money is accepted
before the trial or hearing begins, the cross-claimant may, unless the
Court otherwise orders, tax his costs of the cross-claim, incurred
before service of notice of the acceptance, and, if the costs are not
paid within four days after the signing of a certificate of the
taxation, enter judgement against the party accepting the money for the
taxed costs.

\(3\) Where money is paid into Court with or without a denial of
liability, and the plaintiff recovers less than the amount so paid in,
the plaintiff shall, unless for special cause the Court or a Judge shall
otherwise order, be entitled to an order for his costs to the date of
the payment in, but be ordered to pay all the costs of the defendant so
paying into Court from and after the date of such payment into Court.

### 19\. Offer of contribution. (52/19)

Where a party makes an offer of contribution within the application of
Order 8 Rule 49 (order of contribution), the Court may, in exercising
its discretion as to costs, take the offer into account.

### 20\. Disobedience to rule, judgement or order. (52/20)

Where any person fails to comply with any provision of these Rules or
any judgement or order of the Court, the Court may order him to pay the
costs of any-other person occasioned by the failure.

### 21\. Discovery before suit. (52/21)

The Court may, in proceedings in respect of any claim for relief,
include in any order for costs the costs of a party to the proceedings
of proceedings under Order 3 in respect of that claim for relief
including payments of conduct money and payments on account of expenses
and loss under that Order.

### 22\. Injunction. (52/21A)

Where the Court grants an interlocutory injunction and afterwards grants
a further interlocutory injunction continuing the first injunction with
or without modification an order as to the costs of the further
injunction shall, unless the Court otherwise orders, include the costs
of the first injunction.

Subdivision C.-Party and Party Basis.

### 23\. Application of Subdivision C. (52/22)

This Subdivision applies to costs which are to be paid to a party to any
proceedings either by another party to the proceedings or out of a fund.

### 24\. Party and party basis. (52/23)

\(1\) Costs shall be taxed on a party and party basis unless the costs
are to be taxed on the common fund basis under Rule 32 or on the trustee
basis under Rule 33.

\(2\) On a taxation on a party and party basis, there shall be allowed
all such costs as were necessary or proper for the attainment of justice
or for enforcing or defending the rights of the party whose costs are
being taxed.

### 25\. Costs where judgement for a small amount. (Vic. 65/121)

\(1\) Where in an action for tort or contract the plaintiff recovers by
judgement or otherwise a sum of less than K10,000.00 (or an order for
the possession of goods the value of which is less than K10,000.00 or a
sum of money plus an order for the possession of goods the aggregate
value of which is less than K10,000.00) he shall, unless the Court or
Judge otherwise orders, be entitled only to the costs he would have been
entitled to if he had brought his action in the District Court.

\(2\) For the purposes of Sub-rule (1) a plaintiff shall be treated as
recovering the full amount recoverable in respect of his claim without
regard to any deduction made in respect of contributory negligence on
his part.

### 26\. Second lawyer or overseas counsel.

\(1\) The fees, costs and expenses of -

\(a\) a second lawyer; or

\(b\) overseas counsel,

may be allowed on taxation only if, and to the extent that, they are
certified for by the trial Judge.

\(2\) In this Rule **overseas counsel** means a barrister or solicitor
who is not resident in the country and normally carries on practice as a
lawyer outside the country.

### 27\. Refreshers. (52/25)

\(1\) Where counsel is briefed to appear on a trial or hearing, and the
trial or hearing occupies more than six hours, and costs are taxed on a
party and party basis, the taxing officer may allow refresher fees in
such amount as he thinks fit for every six hours or part of six hours
occupied by the trial or hearing after the first six hours and for the
remaining duration of the trial or hearing.

\(2\) The taxing officer may allow refreshers under Sub-rule (1) whether
or not witnesses are examined at the trial or hearing.

### 28\. Absence of counsel. (52/26)(A.C.T. 65/83)

\(1\) Where counsel is briefed to appear on a trial or hearing, and
costs are taxed on a party and party basis, counsel's fee on the brief
shall not be allowed unless -

\(a\) he is present at the trial or hearing for a substantial part of
the relevant period; or

\(b\) he gives substantial assistance during the relevant period in
the conduct of the proceedings; or

\(c\) the Court otherwise orders.

\(2\) In Sub-rule (1), **relevant period** means the period of the trial
or hearing or, if the trial or hearing lasts more than six hours, the
first six hours.

\(3\) Where counsel is briefed to appear on a trial or hearing, a
refresher fee shall not be allowed to him for any period unless -

\(a\) he is present at the trial or hearing for a substantial part of
that period; or

\(b\) he gives substantial assistance during that period in the
conduct of the proceedings; or

\(c\) the Court otherwise orders.

\(4\) In actions where a barrister and solicitor acts in both
capacities, or appears as a barrister instructed by his partner acting
as solicitor, neither he nor his partner shall be entitled to make any
charge for **Preparing any brief or case to counsel to advise** or
**Preparing any instructions to counsel to settle any document**, but in
lieu of such charges the barrister and solicitor, or partner, as the
case may be, shall be entitled to such fees as are allowed by the taxing
officer for **Preparation for trial.**

### 29\. Six-hour period. (52/27)

In reckoning the six hour periods referred to in Rules 27 and 28 the
mid-day adjournment and any other adjournment shall not be included
unless the Court or the taxing officer otherwise orders.

### 30\. Counsel before Registrar, etc. (52/28)

On a taxation on a party and party basis, or in respect of proceedings
before the Registrar in the probate jurisdiction or the matrimonial
causes jurisdiction, costs in respect of counsel attending before the
Registrar shall not be allowed unless the Registrar certifies the
attendance to be proper or the Court otherwise orders.

Subdivision D.-Common Fund and Trustee Bases.

### 31\. Application of Subdivision D. (52/29)

This Subdivision applies to costs which by or under these Rules or any
order of the Court are to be paid to a party to any proceedings either
by another party to the proceedings or out of a fund.

### 32\. Common fund basis. (52/30)

\(1\) The Court may order that costs be taxed on the common fund basis.

\(2\) The common fund basis is a more generous basis than the party and
party basis.

\(3\) On a taxation on the common fund basis -

\(a\) there shall be allowed a reasonable amount in respect of all
costs reasonably incurred; and

\(b\) the ordinary rules applied on a taxation as between solicitor
and client where the costs are to be paid out of a common fund in
which the client and others are interested shall be applied, whether
or not the costs are in fact to be so paid.

### 33\. Trustee basis. (52/31)

\(1\) Where a person who is or has been a party to proceedings in the
capacity of trustee is entitled to be paid costs out of any fund which
he holds in that capacity, the costs shall be taxed on the trustee
basis.

\(2\) Where the Court makes an order for the payment to a person of
costs out of a fund, the Court may order that the costs be taxed on the
trustee basis and as if he were a trustee of the fund.

\(3\) Where the Court makes an order for the payment to a person of
costs and he is or was a party to the proceedings in the capacity of
trustee, the Court may order that the costs he taxed on the trustee
basis and as if the costs were to be paid out of a fund held by him.

\(4\) On a taxation on the trustee basis, no costs shall be disallowed,
except in so far as those costs or any part of their amount should not,
in accordance with the duty of the trustee as trustee, have been
incurred or paid, and should for that reason be borne by him personally.

Subdivision E.-Solicitor and Client Basis.

### 34\. Application of Subdivision E. (52/32)

Rule 35 applies to any taxation on a solicitor and client basis except
where taxation has been excluded under Section 23 of the *Lawyers Act*.

### 35\. Solicitor and client basis. (52/33)

\(1\) All costs shall be allowed except as specified in this Rule.

\(2\) Costs shall not be allowed in so far as they are of an
unreasonable amount, unless the amount has been approved by the client.

\(3\) Costs shall not be allowed in so far as they are unreasonably
incurred, unless incurred with the approval of the client.

\(4\) An approval for the purpose of this Rule may be express or
implied.

\(5\) Notwithstanding Sub-rules (2) and (3) where costs are incurred
which in the circumstances of the case are of an unusual nature and such
that they would not be allowed on a taxation of costs on a party and
party basis under Rule 24 the costs shall not be allowed, unless it is
shown -

\(a\) that the costs were reasonably incurred; or

\(b\) that before the costs were incurred the solicitor expressly
warned the client that the costs might not be allowed on a taxation of
costs on a party and party basis.

\(6\) Where the client is a disabled person, references to the client in
Sub-rules (2), (3), and (4) shall be read as references to his next
friend or guardian at law.

Subdivision F.-Scale of Costs.

### 36\. Scale of costs. (52/67)

\(1\) Subject to this Rule, the provisions of Table 1 of Schedule 2
shall apply to the taxation of costs incurred in relation to proceedings
commenced in the Court after the commencement date.

\(2\) On a taxation -

\(a\) to which Subdivision D. (common fund and trustee bases) and
Subdivision E. (solicitor and client basis) apply; and

\(b\) in any other special case,

costs may, at the discretion of the taxing officer, be allowed -

\(c\) in relation to items not mentioned in Table 1 of Schedule 2; or

\(d\) of an amount higher than that prescribed by Table 1 of Schedule
2.

\(3\) A taxing officer, when exercising his discretion under Sub-rule
(2) or in respect of any item marked **discretionary** in Table 1 of
Schedule 2 shall have regard to -

\(a\) the complexity of the item or of the proceedings in which it
arose and the difficulty or novelty of the question involved; and

\(b\) the skill, specialized knowledge and responsibility required of
and the time spent and work done by the solicitor or counsel; and

\(c\) the number and importance of the documents (however brief)
prepared or perused; and

\(d\) the place and circumstances in which the business involved was
transacted; and

\(e\) the importance of the proceedings to the client; and

\(f\) where money or property was involved, its amount or value; and

\(g\) any other fees and allowances payable to the solicitor or
counsel in respect of other items in the same proceedings, but only
where work done in relation to those items has reduced the work which
would otherwise have been necessary in relation to the item in
question.

\(4\) Costs shall, unless the Court otherwise orders, be allowed in the
cases to which Table 2 of Schedule 2 applies in accordance with the
provisions of that Table and not in accordance with Table 1 of that
Schedule.

### 37\. Probate. (52/68)

\(1\) Table 5 of Schedule 2 shall apply to proceedings for probate or
administration or for resealing of probate or letters of administration
where no contention has arisen.

\(2\) Unless under Table 5 of Schedule 2 the value of the estate or
unadministered assets exceeds K4,000.00 a solicitor may not, without the
leave of the Court, file his bill for taxation.

\(3\) If the amount allowed on a taxation to which Sub-rule (2) applies,
does not exceed the amount allowable applying Table 5, the solicitor
whose bill it is shall not, unless the taxing officer otherwise orders,
be allowed the costs to which, apart from this Sub-rule, he would be
entitled for drawing and copying the bill and for attending the
taxation.

\(4\) Sub-rule (3) does not affect the operation of Rule 63(b).

\(5\) Where in contentious proceedings the Court directs the taxation of
costs in connection with the obtaining of probate or administration or
resealing of probate or letters of administration, the costs prescribed
in Table 5 of Schedule 2 may, unless the Court otherwise orders, be
allowed separately and in addition to the costs incurred in the
contentious proceedings.

\(6\) A bill for taxation under this Rule shall bear a note of the value
of the estate or of the unadministered assets, whichever is appropriate.

\(7\) A bill, either for taxation or moderation, shall be served on each
executor, administrator or trustee before it is filed.

\(8\) A request for either taxation or moderation shall be endorsed on
the bill in the prescribed form and signed by each executor,
administrator and trustee.

## Division 3.-Taxing Officer.

### 38\. Registrar to be taxing officer. (52/34)

The Registrar shall be the taxing officer of the Court.

### 39\. General powers. (52/37)

The taxing officer may, in the discharge of his functions with respect
to the taxation of costs or any other functions under this Order -

\(a\) dispense with the filing or service of notice of a motion to
proceed with taxation; and

\(b\) require any party represented jointly with any other party in
any proceedings before him to be separately represented and

\(c\) take evidence by the examination of witnesses or otherwise; and

\(d\) direct the production of any document; and

\(e\) adjourn any proceedings before him; and

\(f\) do such other things as the Court may by order direct.

### 40\. Time. (52/38)

The taxing officer may exercise the powers of the Court to extend times
under Order 1 Rule 15 and to fix times under Order l Rule 16, in
relation to the commencement of a taxation and in relation to the doing
of anything in or in connection with the proceedings before him.

### 41\. Absence of party. (52/34)

Where a party entitled to attend any matter before the taxing officer
has had due notice of the time appointed for the matter, or where notice
to a party has been dispensed with under Rule 39, the taxing officer may
proceed in his absence.

### 42\. Costs of proceedings before taxing officer. (52/40)

\(1\) Costs to be taxed under an order shall, unless the order otherwise
provides, include the costs of the taxation.

\(2\) Costs to be taxed under these Rules shall include the costs of the
taxation.

\(3\) Subject to Sub-rules (1), (2) and (4) and to any order of the
Court, a taxing officer may make orders as to the costs of or incidental
to any proceedings before him and shall include in his certificate the
amount of those costs and a statement of the persons to whom and by whom
those costs are to be paid or the fund out of which those costs are to
be paid.

\(4\) Sub-rules (1), (2) and (3) apply subject to any Act and subject to
Sub-rule 56(2).

## Division 4.-Taxation.

### 43\. Order subject to appeals etc. (52/42)

Where an order is made for the payment of costs, and the costs are to be
taxed, the costs may, unless the Court otherwise orders, be taxed,
notwithstanding that the order for payment of costs is liable to be set
aside, varied or discharged on appeal or otherwise.

### 44\. Costs in account. (52/44)

Where the Court orders that an account be taken and the account consists
in part of costs, the Court may, by the same or a later order, direct
that those costs be taxed by the taxing officer.

### 45\. Party costs. (52/43)

\(1\) This Rule applies to costs of or incidental to proceedings in the
Court, including -

\(a\) in the case of an appeal to the Court-the costs of or
incidental to the proceedings giving rise to the appeal; and

\(b\) in the case of proceedings transferred to or removed into the
Court-the costs of or incidental to the whole proceedings, both
before and after removal,

but does not apply to the taxation of costs for any business done by a
solicitor, being a taxation under Section 63 of the Lawyers Act 1986.

\(2\) Where -

\(a\) by or under these Rules costs are to be taxed and are to be paid
to any party either by another party to the proceedings or out of a
fund; or

\(b\) by or under an order of the Court made in any proceedings costs
are to be taxed and are to be paid to any party either by another
party to the proceedings or out of a fund; or

\(c\) in any proceedings the Court makes an order under Rule 44; or

\(d\) costs are payable under any Act under which costs may be taxed
in the Court without an order of or reference to the Court for
taxation, except the taxation of costs to which Paragraphs (a), (b)
and (c) apply,

an application may be made to the Registrar to have the costs taxed.

\(3\) This Rule shall not prevent the parties to an action agreeing as
to the amount of the costs to be paid by the party or fund liable to pay
costs to another party.

### 46\. Application for taxation.

\(1\) An application under Rule 45(2) shall be in writing and shall be
filed.

\(2\) The bill to be taxed and a copy of it shall be annexed to the
application.

\(3\) Where the Court has made an order directing the taxation of the
costs, that order or a copy of it shall also be annexed to the
application.

\(4\) A copy of the application shall be served by the party seeking the
taxation on every other interested party.

### 47\. Application for taxation under Section 63 of the Lawyers Act.

\(1\) This rule applies to proceedings for the taxation of costs under
Section 63 of the Lawyers Act 1986.

\(2\) An application to the Court under Section 63 of the Lawyers Act
1986 shall be made in writing and shall be filed.

\(3\) The bill to be taxed and a copy of it shall be annexed to the
application.

\(4\) A copy of the application shall be served by the person seeking
the taxation on the lawyer who rendered the bill.

\(5\) The succeeding rules of this Division shall apply to an order that
the bill be taxed in the same manner as they apply to an application
under Rule 46, with such modifications as are necessary.

### 48\. Notification of time appointed for taxation.

\(1\) Where an application is made to the Registrar under Rule 45 or an
order for a bill to be taxed is made under Section 63 of the Lawyers Act
1986 the Registrar shall fix a time and place for the taxation and shall
give notice of the time and place so fixed to the person applying for
the taxation or in whose favour the order is made, as the case may be,
to the solicitor concerned, and to every other interested party.

\(2\) The bill shall be taxed and settled by the Registrar at the time
and place fixed by the Registrar under Sub-rule (1) subject to such
adjournments as the Registrar may consider necessary from time to time.

\(3\) Where either party to the proceedings does not appear at the time
and place fixed by the Registrar under Sub-rule (1), the Court may order
the Registrar to proceed with the taxation.

### 49\. Bill. (52/49)

\(1\) A bill shall contain particulars of -

\(a\) the work done by the lawyer, his servants and agents; and

\(b\) the disbursements made; and

\(c\) the costs claimed for the work done.

\(2\) In every bill the professional charges shall be entered in a
separate column from the disbursements, and every column shall be cast
before the bill is left for taxation.

\(3\) Where it is a clerk who does any work included in a bill and that
fact is relevant to the amount of costs allowable for the work, the name
and position of the clerk shall be stated in the bill.

\(4\) Where a liability to make a disbursement has been incurred or a
fee to counsel has been incurred and the disbursement or fee would be
properly included in a bill if paid -

\(a\) the disbursement or fee may be included in the bill
notwithstanding that it has not been paid; and

\(b\) the bill shall state that the disbursement or fee has not been
paid; and

\(c\) subject to Sub-rule (5), on taxation, the disbursement or fee
shall not be allowed unless Paid before the taxation is completed.

\(5\) Sub-rule (4)(c) shall not apply where, in proceedings under the
*Matrimonial Causes Act* 1963, on taxation of a bill of a female
petitioner or respondent, her lawyer gives a written understanding to
the Registrar that all or any fees or disbursements in that bill will be
paid by the lawyer out of the first money received by or on behalf of
his client in payment of the costs allowed.

\(6\) The Court or the taxing officer may give leave, on terms, for the
amendment of a bill.

\(7\) A bill must be endorsed with -

\(a\) the name or firm and business address of the lawyer whose bill
it is; and

\(b\) if the lawyer is the agent of another, with the name or firm and
business address of that other lawyer.

### 50\. Service of bill.

A bill need not be served on a lawyer whose bill it is.

### 51\. Attendance of parties. (52/51)

\(1\) The taxing officer may -

\(a\) arrange and direct what parties should attend before him on any
taxation; and

\(b\) disallow the costs of attendance of any party whose attendance
he considers unnecessary

\(2\) Notwithstanding Sub-rule (1), any party interested may attend any
taxation.

### 52\. Notice of adjournment. (52/52)

Where the taxing officer adjourns a taxation, he may order any party
attending before him to serve notice of the adjournment on any absent
party.

### 53\. Costs out of fund: Notice to persons interested. (52/53)

\(1\) Where costs are payable out of a fund, the taxing officer taxing a
bill of the costs may -

\(a\) adjourn the taxation to a specified date; and

\(b\) order the lawyer whose bill it is or the party to whom the costs
are payable to send to any person interested in the fund, free of
charge to that person, a copy of the whole or any part of the bill and
a letter in accordance with Sub-rule (2).

\(2\) A letter ordered to be sent under Sub-rule (1) shall state -

\(a\) that the costs are payable out of the fund (identifying it) and
that the bill is being taxed; and

\(b\) the name and address of the taxing officer; and

\(c\) the adjourned date for further proceedings with the taxation;
and

\(d\) such other information as the taxing officer may direct.

### 54\. Reference to Court. (52/54)

The taxing officer may, on his own motion, refer to the Court for
direction, any question arising in a taxation.

### 55\. Default of party entitled. (52/55)

\(1\) Where a party is entitled to apply under this Division to have
costs taxed but does not, within a reasonable time after service on him
of a written request to do so by a party liable for the costs, file and
serve an application, the taxing officer may fix a time within which the
party entitled must file and serve an application to have costs taxed.

\(2\) Where a party entitled to costs fails to make application in
accordance with Rule 45 the taxing officer may fix a time within which
the party entitled must file or serve his bill.

\(3\) Where a party entitled to costs fails to file and serve an
application to have the costs taxed or fails to file or serve his bill
within a time fixed under this Rule, the taxing officer may certify the
failure and may disallow the costs of the party entitled or allow them
at such amount as he thinks fit.

\(4\) Where a party entitled to costs defaults by failing to proceed
with taxation, the taxing officer may, for the purpose of preventing any
other party being adversely affected by the default, certify the default
and may -

\(a\) disallow the costs of the defaulting party or allow them at such
amount as he thinks fit; and

\(b\) certify the costs of the other parties.

### 56\. Disallowance of fees for taxation. (52/56)

\(1\) Where a solicitor -

\(a\) fails to file his bill for taxation within the time fixed by or
under this Order; or

\(b\) otherwise delays or impedes the taxation,

the solicitor shall not, unless the taxing officer otherwise orders, be
allowed the fees to which, apart from this Sub-rule, he would be
entitled for preparing his bill of costs and for attending the taxation.

\(2\) If, on the taxation of any costs, one-sixth or more of the amount
of the bill for those costs is taxed off, the solicitor whose bill it is
shall not be allowed the fees to which, apart from this Sub-rule, he
would be entitled for preparing the bill and for attending the taxation.

### 57\. Liability of solicitor. (52/57)

Where, in any proceedings before the taxing officer, a solicitor for any
party -

\(a\) is guilty of neglect or delay; or

\(b\) puts any other party to unnecessary expense, the taxing officer
may order the solicitor to pay costs to any party.

### 58\. Cross costs. (52/58)

\(1\) Where a party entitled to be paid costs is also liable to pay
costs, the taxing officer may -

\(a\) tax the costs which that party is liable to pay and set off the
amount allowed against the amount he is entitled to be paid and
certify the amount of the balance and the parties by and to whom the
balance is payable; or

\(b\) withhold his certificate for the costs which that party is
entitled to be paid until that party has paid or tendered the amount
he is liable to pay.

\(2\) Costs in any proceedings may be set off under Sub-rule (1)(a)
notwithstanding that a solicitor for a party to the proceedings has a
lien for costs in the proceedings.

### 59\. Certificate. (52/59)

\(1\) The taxing officer may make separate and interim certificates.

\(2\) Where, in the course of the taxation of a solicitor's bill to his
own client, it appears to the taxing officer that in any event the
solicitor will be liable in connection with the bill to pay money to the
client, he may make an interim certificate specifying an amount which in
his opinion is payable by the solicitor to the client.

\(3\) The taxing officer shall, after the conclusion of the taxation of
any bill, make a final certificate of his disallowance of the costs in
the bill or of the amount at which he allows the costs.

\(4\) Where the taxing officer decides to allow or disallow, wholly or
in part, any item in a bill or to allow some amount in respect of any
item, he shall not, except with the consent of the parties interested,
make a certificate dealing finally with that item, until the expiry of
14 days after the date of the decision.

\(5\) A certificate made by the taxing officer in any proceedings shall,
unless made on a filed bill, be filed in the proceedings.

\(6\) On the making of a certificate under Sub-rule (2), the Court may
order the amount specified in the certificate to be paid to the client
or into Court.

\(7\) The taxing officer may make a separate or interim certificate in
respect of any item in a bill notwithstanding an application for review
under Rule 60 to his decision on any other item in the hill.

### 60\. Application for review of taxation. (U.K. 62/33)

\(1\) Any party to any taxation proceedings who is dissatisfied with the
allowance or disallowance in whole or in part of any item by the taxing
officer, or with the amount allowed by the taxing officer in respect of
any item, may apply on motion to a Judge to review the decision in
respect of that item.

\(2\) An application for review of the taxing officer's decision shall
be made within 14 days after the date of the decision objected to or
within such further time as the Court may allow.

\(3\) Every applicant for review under this Rule must at the time of
making his application deliver to the taxing officer objections in
writing specifying the list of items to which the applicant objects and
must state concisely the nature and grounds of each objection.

\(4\) An applicant for review under this Rule shall serve a copy of the
objections on each other party (if any) who attended the taxation of
those items and any other person whom the taxing officer directs shall
be served.

### 61\. Review. (U.K. 62/35)

\(1\) On the review, unless the Court for good reason otherwise directs

\(a\) no further evidence shall be received; and

\(b\) a party shall not raise any ground of objection not stated in
the statement of objections delivered to the taxing officer.

\(2\) Subject to Sub-rule (1), on the review the Court may exercise all
such powers and discretions as are vested in the taxing officer in
relation to the subject matter of the application.

### 62\. Judgement. (52/63)

Where the amount of any costs has been certified under this Division the
Court may, on motion by a party, direct the entry of such judgement for
the costs as the nature of the case requires.

## Division 5.-Miscellaneous.

### 63\. Costs of solicitor appointed as guardian at law. (52/64)

Where the Court appoints a solicitor to be guardian at law or next
friend of a disabled person who is a party to any proceedings, the Court
may -

\(a\) order that the costs to be incurred in performance of the duties
of guardian at law or next friend be paid-

\(i\) by the parties to the proceedings or any of them; or

\(ii\) out of any fund in Court in which the disabled person is
interested; and

\(b\) make orders for the repayment or allowance of the costs as the
nature of the case may require.

### 64\. Trustee or mortgagee. (52/65)

\(1\) Where a person is or has been a party to any proceedings in the
capacity of trustee or mortgagee, he shall, unless the Court otherwise
orders, be entitled to the costs of the proceedings out of the fund held
by the trustee or out of the mortgaged property, as the case may be, in
so far as the costs are not paid by any other person.

\(2\) The Court may otherwise order under Sub-rule (1) only where -

\(a\) the trustee or mortgagee has acted unreasonably; or

\(b\) in the case of a trustee, he has in substance acted for his own
benefit rather than for the benefit of the fund.

### 65\. Personal liability of solicitor for costs. (52/66)

\(1\) Where costs are incurred improperly or without reasonable cause,
or are wasted by undue delay or by any other misconduct or default, and
it appears to the Court that a solicitor is responsible (whether
personally or through a servant or agent), the Court may, after giving
the solicitor a reasonable opportunity to be heard -

\(a\) disallow the costs as between him and his client; and

\(b\) direct the solicitor to repay to his client costs which the
client has been ordered to pay to any other party; and

\(c\) direct the solicitor to indemnify any party other than his
client against costs payable by the party indemnified.

\(2\) Without limiting the generality of Sub-rule (1) a solicitor is
responsible for default for the purposes of that Sub-rule where any
proceedings cannot conveniently proceed, or fail or are adjourned
without useful progress being made, because of the failure of the
solicitor -

\(a\) to attend in person or by a proper representative; or

\(b\) to file any document which ought to have been filed; or

\(c\) to deliver any document which ought to have been delivered for
the use of the Court; or

\(d\) to be prepared with any proper evidence or account; or

\(e\) otherwise to proceed.

\(3\) The Court may, before making an order under Sub-rule (1), refer
the matter to the taxing officer for enquiry and report.

\(4\) The Court may order that notice of any proceedings or order
against a solicitor under this Rule shall be given to his client in such
manner as may be specified in the order under this sub-rule.

