# ORDER 23.- HUMAN RIGHTS.

### 1\. Interpretation.

In this Part, unless the contrary intention appears:

*Basic Rights* means the rights and freedoms described in Rule 5;

*Bougainville Constitution* means the *Constitution of the Autonomous
Region of Bougainville*;

*Constitutional Laws* has the same meaning it has in the Constitution;

*Human Rights* refers to the rights and freedoms described in Rule 5;

*Listing Judge* means the Judge conducting listing of cases pursuant
to the Listings Rules.

*Listings Rules* means Order 10 Rule 9A of the *National Court Rules*;

### 2\. Purpose.

The purpose of these Rules is to facilitate a quick and just resolution
of Court proceedings instituted under Sections 57 and 58 of the
*Constitution* for enforcement of the Basic Rights (also known as "Human
Rights") and for enforcement under Section 23 of the *Constitution* of
prohibitions, restrictions or duties imposed by the Constitutional Laws
and of related matters.

### 3\. Administration.

\(1\) There shall be a Human Rights List maintained by the Registrar
which shall contain the reference numbers, names and status of the
proceedings described in Rule 5.

\(2\) The Chief Justice may appoint a Judge to be Judge Administrator of
the Human Rights Track at the Waigani Registry and may from time to time
appoint any Judge to deal with proceedings on the Human Rights List.

\(3\) The Registrar shall appoint an officer to be the senior officer in
charge of registry matters concerning the Human Rights List and shall
appoint such other staff as are necessary to ensure the efficient and
orderly running of the Human Rights List.

### 4\. Application.

These Rules are designed to facilitate the running of the Human Rights
List.

### 5\. Human rights proceedings.

The following proceedings shall be placed on the Human Rights List, and
shall be dealt with in accordance with these Rules:

a\) proceedings that are, in substance, irrespective of whether
expressly so described, for enforcement under Sections 57 (*enforcement
of guaranteed rights and freedoms*) or 58 (*compensation*) of the
*Constitution* of any of the Basic Rights, viz:

i\) right to freedom (s 32);

ii\) right to life (s 35);

iii\) freedom from inhuman treatment (s 36);

iv\) protection of the law (s 37);

v\) proscribed acts (s 41);

vi\) liberty of the person (s 42);

vii\) freedom from forced labour (s 43);

viii\) freedom from arbitrary search and entry (s 44);

ix\) freedom of conscience, thought and religion (s 45);

x\) freedom of expression (s 46);

xi\) freedom of assembly and association (s 47);

xii\) freedom of employment (s 48);

xiii\) right to privacy (s 49);

xiv\) right to vote and stand for public office (s 50);

xv\) right to freedom of information (s 51);

xvi\) right to freedom of movement (s 52);

xvii\) protection from unjust deprivation of property (s 53);

xviii\) equality of citizens (s 55); and

b\) proceedings under Section 183 of the Bougainville *Constitution* for
enforcement of Basic Rights under that *Constitution*; and

c\) proceedings under Section 23 (*sanctions*) of the *Constitution* for
imposition of sanctions for breach of prohibitions, restrictions or
duties imposed by the Constitutional Laws in regard to human rights
issues; and

d\) complaints under Section 42(5) (*liberty of the person*) of the
*Constitution* that a person is unlawfully or unreasonably detained; and

e\) proceedings where a claim is made by the plaintiff for any relief or
remedy for any tort allegedly committed by a member of a disciplined
force, where the cause of action might reasonably be regarded as a
breach of one or more of the Basic Rights; and

f\) proceedings where the issues of fact or law that are likely to arise
overlap with the type of issues of fact or law that commonly arise in
enforcement proceedings under Sections 57, 58 or 23 of the
*Constitution*;

g\) any proceedings within the jurisdiction of the National Court
concerning the discharge of powers, functions, duties or
responsibilities under Part X (emergency powers) of the *Constitution*;
and

h\) applications for a writ of *habeas corpus* under Order 17 of the
*National Court Rules*; and

i\) proceedings for enforcement of the provisions of the *Correctional
Service Act* and the *Correctional Service Regulation* concerning
treatment of detainees, calculation of periods of detention and related
proceedings; and

j\) applications under Section 5(2)(c)(iii) (*notice of claims against
the State*) of the *[Claims By and Against the State Act](http://www.paclii.org/cgi-bin/sinodisp/pg/legis/consol_act/cbaatsa1996267/cbaatsa1996267.html)* to allow a
further period in which to give notice to the State of an intention to
make a claim against the State, where the claim relates to enforcement
of a right or freedom referred to in Division III.3 of the
*Constitution*.

### 6\. Standing to Bring or Appear in Proceedings.

Without derogating from Sections 57(1) and (2) of the *Constitution*,
persons who may bring or commence or appear in a human rights proceeding
include:

\(a\) a person whose human rights or freedoms are adversely affected
by any act or omission of -

\(i\) the government or a governmental body or a person exercising
public power or performing public functions; or

\(ii\) a private person or a body corporate, including a company, and
any of its officers or employees exercising private powers or
performing private functions;

\(b\) a person acting on behalf of a person who is under a disability
or is unable to fully and freely exercise their right to bring an
application for enforcement of their human rights or freedoms;

\(c\) a person or body, whether public or private, who has an interest
in the protection and enforcement of human rights and freedoms;

\(d\) a person representing an international body with responsibility
for, or a principle function of which is, to protecting human rights
and freedoms under international laws and conventions such as the
*Universal Declaration of Human Rights* and any other declarations,
recommendations or decisions of the *General Assembly of the United
Nations* concerning human rights and freedoms;

\(e\) any other person or body who has a sufficient interest in the
protection and enforcement of human rights and freedoms, approved by
the Court.

### 7\. Commencement of Proceedings by a Party.

\(1\) A human rights proceeding may be commenced by:

\(a\) a Writ of Summons, in which case the file reference shall be "WS
(HR)";

\(b\) an Originating Summons, in which case the file reference shall
be "OS (HR)";

\(c\) filing a Human Rights Enforcement Application in Form 124, in
which case the file reference shall be "HRA".

\(2\) The person commencing proceedings under Sub-rule (1) shall be
called the "plaintiff" and the person against whom proceedings are
commenced shall be called "the defendant".

\(3\) The originating process for enforcement of a right or freedom
referred to in Division III.3 of the *Constitution* shall as far as is
practicable identify with precision, by reference to relevant provisions
of the *Constitution*:

\(a\) the right or freedom that has been allegedly infringed or of
which there is a reasonable probability of infringement; and

\(b\) the orders, declarations or other relief that is sought.

\(4\) A complaint under Section 42(5) of the *Constitution* that a
person is unlawfully or unreasonably detained may be made by filing a
Complaint of Unlawful or Unreasonable Detention in Form 125, in which
case -

\(a\) the file reference shall be "HRC",

\(b\) the person making the complaint shall be called "the
complainant" and the person(s) against whom the complaint is made
shall be called "the respondent(s)".

\(5\) As to Filing Fees

\(a\) The filing of a Human Rights Enforcement Application or a
Complaint of Unlawful or Unreasonable Detention shall be free of fees;
and

\(b\) The Registrar shall for the purposes of other human rights
proceedings exercise the discretion whether a filing fee should be
paid by a plaintiff taking into account the nature of the proceedings
and whether payment of a filing fee might be a hardship to the
plaintiff.

\(6\) All human rights applications filed and pending determination by
the National Court prior to commencement of the Human Rights Rules shall
be retained under file reference MP No \... of \... (HR) and shall
constitute the inaugural Human Rights List.

### 8\. Commencement of Proceedings by the Court.

\(1\) Where a judge observes, or is informed by the Registrar or the
Sheriff or one of their officers, of facts which may constitute a breach
of Basic Rights the Court may commence proceedings on its own
initiative.

\(2\) Where the National Court commences proceedings on its own
initiative in accordance with Section 57 of the *Constitution* -

\(a\) the file reference shall be "HROI" and the responding party, if
any, shall be called "the respondent"; and

\(b\) subject to this Rule, the originating process shall be in Form
126 or in such other terms as the Court considers appropriate.

\(3\) Nothing in these Rules derogates from the power and duty of the
National Court under Section 57(1) of the *Constitution* to, on its own
initiative, enforce the rights and freedoms referred to in Division
III.3 (basic rights) of the *Constitution* in an informal or such other
manner as the Court thinks fit, especially in urgent cases where it is
not practical to comply with formal requirements for commencement of
proceedings.

\(4\) Where the Court exercises a power under Sub-rule (2) a Court shall
ensure, that as soon as the circumstances permit, not being later than
seven days after the exercise of such power, a reference in Form 126 is
filed and thereafter served on the respondents.

### 9\. Statement of Alleged or Suspected Breach of Human Rights.

\(1\) Any Judge or Officer of the Court or any member of the Court staff
or any person, body or authority, including any member of the public,
may bring any instance of alleged or suspected breach or imminent breach
or threatened breach of human rights or freedoms to the attention of the
Court by delivering to the Registrar a completed Statement of Alleged or
Suspected Breach of Human Rights, in Form 127.

\(2\) After receiving a Statement of Alleged or Suspected Breach of
Human Rights, the Registrar shall, within one day, forward the
Statement, together with all other relevant information in the
possession of the Registrar, to a Judge.

\(3\) After receiving a Statement and other relevant information under
Sub-rule (2), the Judge shall decide what further action, if any, is
necessary, including whether to open a HROI file in relation to the
matter and whether to direct the Public Solicitor under Section
177(2)(b) of the *Constitution* to provide legal aid, advice and
assistance to a person.

### 10\. Request to place a proceeding on Human Rights List or to Remove a
Proceeding.

\(1\) When any proceedings are filed in Court, the plaintiff may
request, by filing a notice in Form 128, that the proceedings be placed
on the Human Rights List and, irrespective of whether such a request is
made, the Registrar or his delegate will decide, having regard to Rule 5
and other relevant considerations, whether the proceedings are
appropriate to be placed on the Human Rights List or on some other List.

\(2\) A person aggrieved by a decision under Sub-rule (1) may apply a
Judge, by notice of motion, for review of the decision, supported by a
listing statement in Form 129; and in such a case all parties to the
proceedings shall be given notice of the motion and the listing
statement, and shall have a right to be heard on the motion.

\(3\) The decision of the Court on a motion under Sub-rule (2) is final
and not subject to appeal.

### 11\. Applications, motions and directions after listing.

\(1\) Once a proceeding is placed on the Human Rights List, any
application or motion regarding that proceeding shall be set for hearing
before the Judge dealing with matters on the Human Rights List.

\(2\) Proceedings on the Human Rights List shall be set down for trial
in accordance with the directions of the Human Rights List Judge, who
may make such orders or give such directions under the Listings Rules as
are appropriate to ensure the just, efficient and expeditious disposal
of cases.

### 12\. Dispensation.

The provisions of Division 1.2 (general) of the *National Court Rules*
apply to these Rules.


